# §6. Integral morphisms and finite morphisms

## 6.1. Preschemes integral over another

**Definition.**

<!-- label: II.6.1.1 -->

Let $X$ be an $S$-prescheme and $f : X \to S$ its structure morphism. We say that $X$ is _integral over_ $S$, or that
$f$ is an _integral morphism_, if there exists a cover $(S_{\alpha})$ of $S$ by affine opens such that, for every
$\alpha$, the induced prescheme $f^{-1}(S_{\alpha})$ is an affine scheme whose ring $B_{\alpha}$ is an _integral
algebra_ over the ring $A_{\alpha}$ of $S_{\alpha}$. We say that $X$ is _finite over_ $S$, or that $f$ is a _finite
morphism_, if $X$ is integral and of finite type over $S$.

When $S$ is affine of ring $A$, we shall also say "integral (resp. finite) over $A$" instead of "integral (resp. finite)
over $S$".

**(6.1.2)**

<!-- label: II.6.1.2 -->

It is clear that if $X$ is integral over $S$, then it is affine over $S$. For an affine prescheme $X$ over $S$ to be
integral (resp. finite) over $S$, it is necessary and sufficient that the associated quasi-coherent
$\mathcal{O}_{S}$-algebra $\mathcal{A}(X)$ be such that there exists a cover $(S_{\alpha})$ of $S$ by affine opens with
the property that, for every $\alpha$, $\Gamma(S_{\alpha}, \mathcal{A}(X))$ is an integral (resp. integral and of finite
type) algebra over $\Gamma(S_{\alpha}, \mathcal{O}_{S})$. A quasi-coherent $\mathcal{O}_{S}$-algebra with this property
is said to be _integral_ (resp. _finite_) over $\mathcal{O}_{S}$. To give an integral (resp. finite) prescheme over $S$
is therefore the same (1.3.1) as to give a quasi-coherent $\mathcal{O}_{S}$-algebra that is integral (resp. finite) over
$\mathcal{O}_{S}$. Note that a quasi-coherent $\mathcal{O}_{S}$-algebra $\mathcal{B}$ is finite if and only if it is an
$\mathcal{O}_{S}$-module of finite type `(I, 1.3.9)`; this is equivalent to saying that $\mathcal{B}$ is an integral
$\mathcal{O}_{S}$-algebra of finite type, since an algebra that is integral and of finite type over a ring $A$ is an
$A$-module of finite type.

**Proposition.**

<!-- label: II.6.1.3 -->

Let $S$ be a locally Noetherian prescheme. For an affine prescheme $X$ over $S$ to be finite over $S$, it is necessary
and sufficient that the $\mathcal{O}_{S}$-algebra $\mathcal{A}(X)$ be coherent.

**Proof.** Taking the preceding remark into account, this comes down to noting that, if $S$ is locally Noetherian, the
quasi-coherent $\mathcal{O}_{S}$-modules of finite type are exactly the coherent $\mathcal{O}_{S}$-modules `(I, 1.5.1)`.

**Proposition.**

<!-- label: II.6.1.4 -->

Let $X$ be an integral (resp. finite) prescheme over $S$ and $f : X \to S$ its structure morphism. Then, for every
affine open $U \subset S$ of ring $A$, $f^{-1}(U)$ is an affine scheme whose ring $B$ is an integral (resp. finite)
algebra over $A$.

<!-- original page 111 -->

**Proof.** We first prove the following lemma.

**Lemma.**

<!-- label: II.6.1.4.1 -->

Let $A$ be a ring, $M$ an $A$-module, and $(g_{i})_{1 \leq i \leq m}$ a finite system of elements of $A$ such that the
$D(g_{i})$ ($1 \leq i \leq m$) cover $\operatorname{Spec}(A)$. If, for every $i$, $M_{g_{i}}$ is an $A_{g_{i}}$-module
of finite type, then $M$ is an $A$-module of finite type.

**Proof.** We may assume that each $M_{g_{i}}$ admits a finite system of generators $(m_{ij}/g^{n}_{i})$ with $m_{ij}
\in M$, with $n$ the same for all indices $i$. We show that the $m_{ij}$ form a system of generators of $M$. Let $M'$ be
the sub-$A$-module of $M$ generated by these elements, and let $m$ be an element of $M$. By hypothesis, for each $i$,
there exist $a_{ij} \in A$ and an integer $p$ (independent of $i$) such that, in $M_{g_{i}}$, $m/1 = (\sum_{j} a_{ij}
m_{ij})/g^{p}_{i}$; this implies that there exists an integer $r \geq p$ such that, for every $i$, $g^{r}_{i} m \in M'$.
Now, since the $D(g^{r}_{i}) = D(g_{i})$ cover $\operatorname{Spec}(A)$, the ideal of $A$ generated by the $g^{r}_{i}$
is equal to $A$; in other words, there exist elements $a_{i} \in A$ such that $\sum_{i} a_{i} g^{r}_{i} = 1$, and
consequently $m = (\sum_{i} a_{i} g^{r}_{i}) m \in M'$, whence the lemma.

This being so, we already know `(1.3.2)` that $f^{-1}(U)$ is affine. If $\phi$ is the homomorphism $A \to B$
corresponding to $f$, there exists a finite cover of $U$ by opens $D(g_{i})$ ($g_{i} \in A$) such that, if $h_{i} =
\phi(g_{i})$, then $B_{h_{i}}$ is an integral (resp. integral and finite) algebra over $A_{g_{i}}$. Indeed, there is a
cover of $U$ by affine opens $V_{\alpha} \subset U$ such that, if $A_{\alpha} = \mathcal{A}(V_{\alpha})$, $B_{\alpha} =
\mathcal{A}(f^{-1}(V_{\alpha}))$ is an integral (resp. finite) algebra over $A_{\alpha}$. Every $x \in U$ belongs to
some $V_{\alpha}$, so there exists $g \in A$ such that $x \in D(g) \subset V_{\alpha}$; if $g_{\alpha}$ is the image of
$g$ in $A_{\alpha}$, then $\mathcal{A}(D(g)) = A_{g} = (A_{\alpha})_{g_{\alpha}}$. Let $h = \phi(g)$ and let
$h_{\alpha}$ be the image of $g_{\alpha}$ in $B_{\alpha}$; we have

$$ \mathcal{A}(D(h)) = B_{h} = (B_{\alpha})_{h_{\alpha}} $$

and, since $B_{\alpha}$ is integral (resp. finite) over $A_{\alpha}$, $(B_{\alpha})_{h_{\alpha}}$ is integral (resp.
finite) over $(A_{\alpha})_{g_{\alpha}}$. It now suffices to use the fact that $U$ is quasi-compact to obtain the
desired cover.

If we first suppose that the $B_{h_{i}}$ are integral and finite over the $A_{g_{i}}$, then since $B_{h_{i}}$, viewed as
an $A_{g_{i}}$-module, also coincides with $B_{g_{i}}$, Lemma (6.1.4.1) shows that in this case $B$ is an $A$-module of
finite type.

Now suppose only that each $B_{h_{i}}$ is integral over $A_{g_{i}}$; let $b \in B$, and let $C$ be the sub-$A$-algebra
of $B$ generated by $b$. For every $i$, $C_{h_{i}}$ is the algebra over $A_{g_{i}}$ generated by $b/1$ in $B_{h_{i}}$;
it follows from the hypothesis that each $C_{h_{i}}$ is an $A_{g_{i}}$-module of finite type, hence (6.1.4.1) $C$ is an
$A$-module of finite type, which proves that $B$ is integral over $A$.

**Proposition.**

<!-- label: II.6.1.5 -->

- (i) A closed immersion is finite (and _a fortiori_ integral).
- (ii) The composition of two finite (resp. integral) morphisms is finite (resp. integral).
- (iii) If $f : X \to Y$ is a finite (resp. integral) $S$-morphism, then $f_{(S')} : X_{(S')} \to Y_{(S')}$ is finite
  (resp. integral) for every base extension $S' \to S$.
- (iv) If $f : X \to Y$ and $g : X' \to Y'$ are two finite (resp. integral) $S$-morphisms, then so is $f \times_{S} g :
  X \times_{S} X' \to Y \times_{S} Y'$.
- (v) If $f : X \to Y$ and $g : Y \to Z$ are morphisms such that $g \circ f$ is finite (resp. integral) and $g$ is
  separated, then $f$ is finite (resp. integral).
- (vi) If $f : X \to Y$ is a finite (resp. integral) morphism, then so is $f_{red}$.

<!-- original page 112 -->

**Proof.** By `(I, 5.5.12)`, it suffices to prove (i), (ii), and (iii). To prove that a closed immersion $X \to S$ is
finite, we may restrict to the case $S = \operatorname{Spec}(A)$, and everything then comes down to noting that a
quotient ring $A/\mathfrak{j}$ is a monogeneous $A$-module. To prove that the composition of two finite (resp. integral)
morphisms $X \to Y$, $Y \to Z$ is finite (resp. integral), we may again assume that $Z$ (and hence $X$ and $Y$
`(1.3.4)`) is affine, and the claim then amounts to: if $B$ is a finite (resp. integral) $A$-algebra and $C$ a finite
(resp. integral) $B$-algebra, then $C$ is a finite (resp. integral) $A$-algebra, which is immediate. Finally, to prove
(iii), we may restrict to the case $S = Y$, since $X_{(S')}$ is identified with $X \times_{Y} Y_{(S')}$ `(I, 3.3.11)`;
we may further assume that $S = \operatorname{Spec}(A)$ and $S' = \operatorname{Spec}(A')$; then $X$ is affine of ring
$B$ `(1.3.4)`, $X_{(S')}$ is affine of ring $A' \otimes_{A} B$, and it suffices to remark that if $B$ is a finite (resp.
integral) $A$-algebra, then $A' \otimes_{A} B$ is a finite (resp. integral) $A'$-algebra.

We also note that if $X$ and $Y$ are two $S$-preschemes that are finite (resp. integral) over $S$, their sum $X \sqcup
Y$ is a finite (resp. integral) prescheme over $S$, since this comes down to seeing that if $B$ and $C$ are finite
(resp. integral) $A$-algebras, then so is $B \times C$.

**Corollary.**

<!-- label: II.6.1.6 -->

If $X$ is an integral (resp. finite) prescheme over $S$, then, for every open $U \subset S$, $f^{-1}(U)$ is integral
(resp. finite) over $U$.

**Proof.** This is a particular case of (6.1.5, (iii)).

**Corollary.**

<!-- label: II.6.1.7 -->

Let $f : X \to Y$ be a finite morphism. Then, for every $y \in Y$, the fibre $f^{-1}(y)$ is a finite algebraic scheme
over $\kappa(y)$, and _a fortiori_ its underlying space is discrete and finite.

**Proof.** Indeed, as a $\kappa(y)$-prescheme, $f^{-1}(y)$ is identified with $X \times_{Y}
\operatorname{Spec}(\kappa(y))$ `(I, 3.6.1)`, which is finite over $\operatorname{Spec}(\kappa(y))$ (6.1.5, (iii)); it
is thus an affine scheme whose ring is an algebra of finite rank over $\kappa(y)$ (6.1.4). The corollary then follows
from `(I, 6.4.4)`.

**Corollary.**

<!-- label: II.6.1.8 -->

Let $X$, $S$ be two integral preschemes and $f : X \to S$ a _dominant_ morphism. If $f$ is integral (resp. finite), then
the field $R(X)$ of rational functions on $X$ is algebraic (resp. algebraic of finite degree) over the field $R(S)$ of
rational functions on $S$.

**Proof.** Let $s$ be the generic point of $S$; the $\kappa(s)$-prescheme $f^{-1}(s)$ is integral (resp. finite) over
$\operatorname{Spec}(\kappa(s))$ (6.1.5, (iii)) and contains, by hypothesis, the generic point $x$ of $X$; the local
ring of $x$ in $f^{-1}(s)$, being equal to $\kappa(x)$ `(I, 3.6.5)`, is a local ring of an integral (resp. finite)
algebra over $\kappa(s)$ (6.1.4), whence the corollary.

**Remark.**

<!-- label: II.6.1.9 -->

The hypothesis that $g$ is separated is essential for the validity of (6.1.5, (v)): indeed, if $Y$ is not separated over
$Z$, then the identity `1_Y` is the composite morphism $Y \to^{\Delta_{Y}} Y \times_{Z} Y \to^{p_{1}} Y$, but
$\Delta_{Y}$ is not an integral morphism, as follows from (6.1.10):

**Proposition.**

<!-- label: II.6.1.10 -->

Every integral morphism is universally closed.

**Proof.** Let $f : X \to Y$ be an integral morphism; by (6.1.5, (iii)), it suffices to show that $f$ is closed. Let $Z$
be a closed part of $X$; there exists a subprescheme of $X$ whose

<!-- original page 113 -->

underlying space is $Z$ `(I, 5.2.1)`, and it therefore follows from (6.1.5, (i) and (ii)) that we may restrict to
proving that $f(X)$ is closed in $Y$. By (6.1.5, (vi)), we may assume that $X$ and $Y$ are reduced; furthermore, if $T$
is the closed reduced subprescheme of $Y$ whose underlying space is $f(X)$ `(I, 5.2.1)`, we know that $f$ factors as $X
\to T \to^{j} Y$, where $j$ is the injection morphism `(I, 5.2.2)`, and since $j$ is separated `(I, 5.5.1, (i))`, it
follows from (6.1.5, (v)) that $g$ is an integral morphism. We may therefore assume that $f(X)$ is dense in $Y$.
Finally, since the question is local on $Y$, we may restrict to the case $Y = \operatorname{Spec}(A)$. Then $X =
\operatorname{Spec}(B)$, where $B$ is an $A$-algebra that is integral over $A$ (6.1.4); moreover, $A$ is reduced
`(I, 5.1.4)` and the hypothesis that $f(X)$ is dense in $Y$ implies that the homomorphism $\phi : A \to B$ corresponding
to $f$ is injective `(I, 1.2.7)`. To say that under these conditions $f(X) = Y$ means that every prime ideal of $A$ is
the trace on $A$ of a prime ideal of $B$, which is none other than the first theorem of Cohen–Seidenberg ([13], t. I, p.
257, th. 3).

**Corollary.**

<!-- label: II.6.1.11 -->

Every finite morphism $f : X \to Y$ is projective.

**Proof.** Since $f$ is affine, $\mathcal{O}_{X}$ is a very ample $\mathcal{O}_{X}$-module relative to $f$ (5.1.2);
furthermore, $f_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X})$ is a quasi-coherent $\mathcal{O}_{Y}$-module of finite type (6.1.2); finally, $f$
is separated, of finite type, and universally closed (6.1.10), so we are in the conditions of application of criterion
(5.5.4, (i)).

**Proposition.**

<!-- label: II.6.1.12 -->

Let $f : X' \to X$ be a finite morphism, and let $\mathcal{B} = f_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X'})$ (which is a quasi-coherent
$\mathcal{O}_{X}$-algebra and an $\mathcal{O}_{X}$-module of finite type). Let $\mathcal{F}'$ be a quasi-coherent
$\mathcal{O}_{X'}$-module; for $\mathcal{F}'$ to be locally free of rank $r$, it is necessary and sufficient that
$f_{*}(\mathcal{F}')$ be a locally free $\mathcal{B}$-module of rank $r$.

**Proof.** It is clear that if $f_{*}(\mathcal{F}')|U$ is isomorphic to $\mathcal{B}^{r}|U$ ($U$ open in $X$), then
$\mathcal{F}'|f^{-1}(U)$ is isomorphic to $\mathcal{O}^{r}_{X'}|f^{-1}(U)$ (1.4.2). Conversely, suppose that
$\mathcal{F}'$ is locally free of rank $r$, and let us show that $f_{*}(\mathcal{F}')$ is locally isomorphic to
$\mathcal{B}^{r}$ as a $\mathcal{B}$-module. Let $x$ be a point of $X$; as $U$ runs over a fundamental system of affine
neighbourhoods of $x$, $f^{-1}(U)$ runs over a fundamental system of affine neighbourhoods (1.2.5) of the finite set
$f^{-1}(x)$, since $f$ is closed (6.1.10). The proposition then follows from the following lemma:

**Lemma.**

<!-- label: II.6.1.12.1 -->

Let $Y$ be a prescheme, $\mathcal{E}$ a locally free $\mathcal{O}_{Y}$-module of rank $r$, and $Z$ a finite part of $Y$
contained in an affine open $V$. Then there exists a neighbourhood $U \subset V$ of $Z$ such that $\mathcal{E}|U$ is
isomorphic to $\mathcal{O}^{r}_{Y}|U$.

**Proof.** We may evidently assume $Y$ affine; for every $z_{i} \in Z$, there exists in the closure ${z_{i}}$ at least
one closed point $z'_{i}$ `(0, 2.1.3)`; if $Z'$ is the set of the $z'_{i}$, every neighbourhood of $Z'$ is a
neighbourhood of $Z$, and we may therefore assume that $Z$ is closed in $Y$ and discrete. Consider the closed reduced
subprescheme of $Y$ having $Z$ as its underlying space `(I, 5.2.1)` and let $j : Z \to Y$ be the canonical injection;
$j*(\mathcal{E}) = \mathcal{E} \otimes_{Y} \mathcal{O}_{Z}$ is locally free of rank $r$ on the discrete scheme $Z$, and
is therefore isomorphic to $\mathcal{O}^{r}_{Z}$; in other words, there exist $r$ sections $s_{i}$ ($1 \leq i \leq r$)
of $\mathcal{E} \otimes_{Y} \mathcal{O}_{Z}$ over $Z$ such that the homomorphism $\mathcal{O}^{r}_{Z} \to \mathcal{E}
\otimes_{Y} \mathcal{O}_{Z}$ defined by these sections is bijective. But $Y = \operatorname{Spec}(A)$ is affine, $Z$ is
defined by an ideal $\mathfrak{j}$ of $A$, and we have $\mathcal{E} = \tilde{M}$, where $M$ is an $A$-module; the
$s_{i}$ are elements

<!-- original page 114 -->

of $M \otimes_{A} (A/\mathfrak{j})$ and are therefore images of $r$ elements $t_{i} \in M = \Gamma(Y, \mathcal{E})$. For
every $z_{j} \in Z$ there is then a neighbourhood $V_{j}$ of $z_{j}$ such that the restrictions of the $t_{i}$ to
$V_{j}$ define an isomorphism $\mathcal{O}^{r}_{Y}|V_{j} \xrightarrow{\sim} \mathcal{E}|V_{j}$ `(0, 5.5.4)`; the
neighbourhood $U$ given by the union of the $V_{j}$ therefore meets the question.

**Proposition.**

<!-- label: II.6.1.13 -->

Let $g : X' \to X$ be an integral morphism of preschemes, $Y$ a normal locally integral prescheme, and $f$ a rational
map from $Y$ to $X'$ such that $g \circ f$ is an everywhere defined rational map `(I, 7.2.1)`. Then $f$ is everywhere
defined.

**Proof.** If $f_{1}$ and $f_{2}$ are two morphisms (from dense opens of $Y$ to $X'$) in the class $f$, it is clear that
$g \circ f_{1}$ and $g \circ f_{2}$ are equivalent morphisms, which justifies the notation $g \circ f$ for their
equivalence class. We recall also that, if we further suppose $Y$ to be locally Noetherian, then the hypothesis that $Y$
is normal already implies that $Y$ is locally integral `(I, 6.1.13)`.

To prove (6.1.13), let us first note that the question is local on $Y$, and so we may assume that there exists in the
class $g \circ f$ a morphism $h : Y \to X$. Consider the inverse image $Y' = X'_{(h)} = X'_{(Y)}$, and note that the
morphism $g' = g_{(Y)} : Y' \to Y$ is integral (6.1.5, (iii)). In view of the correspondence between rational maps from
$Y$ to $X'$ and rational $Y$-sections of $Y'$ `(I, 7.1.2)`, we see that we are reduced to proving the particular case of
(6.1.13) in which $X = Y$; in other words:

**Corollary.**

<!-- label: II.6.1.14 -->

Let $X$ be a normal locally integral prescheme, $g : X' \to X$ an integral morphism, and $f$ a rational $X$-section of
$X'$. Then $f$ is everywhere defined.

**Proof.** Since the question is local on $X$, we may assume $X$ integral, and then $f$ is identified with a morphism
from an open $U$ of $X$ to $X'$ `(I, 7.2.2)` which is a $U$-section of $g^{-1}(U)$. Since $g$ is separated, $f$ is a
closed immersion of $U$ into $g^{-1}(U)$ `(I, 5.4.6)`; let $Z$ be the closed subprescheme of $g^{-1}(U)$ associated to
$f$ `(I, 4.2.1)`, which is isomorphic to $U$, hence integral; let $X_{1}$ be the reduced subprescheme of $X'$ whose
underlying space is the closure $\bar{Z}$ of $Z$ in $X'$ `(I, 5.2.1)`; then $Z$ is a subprescheme induced on an open of
$X_{1}$ `(I, 5.2.3)`, and, being irreducible, so is $X_{1}$, which is therefore integral. The morphism $f$ can then be
considered as a rational $X$-section of $X_{1}$; since the restriction of $g$ to $X_{1}$ is an integral morphism (6.1.5,
(i) and (ii)), we are finally reduced to proving (6.1.14) in the particular case $X' = X_{1}$; in other words:

**Corollary.**

<!-- label: II.6.1.15 -->

Let $X$ be a normal integral prescheme, $X'$ an integral prescheme, and $g : X' \to X$ an integral morphism. If there
exists a rational $X$-section $f$ of $X'$, then $g$ is an isomorphism.

**Proof.** Since the question is local on $X$, we may assume $X$ affine of integral ring $A$, and then $X'$ is affine of
ring $A'$ integral over $A$ (6.1.4) and integral; furthermore, the argument of (6.1.14) shows that there exists a dense
open in $X$ isomorphic to a dense open of $X'$, hence $A$ and $A'$ have the same field of fractions. On the other hand,
by `(I, 8.2.1.1)` and the hypothesis that the $\mathcal{O}_{x}$ are integrally closed, the ring $A$ is integrally
closed, hence $A' = A$, which completes the proof of (6.1.13).

## 6.2. Quasi-finite morphisms

**Proposition.**

<!-- label: II.6.2.1 -->

Let $f : X \to Y$ be a morphism locally of finite type, $x$ a point of $X$. The following conditions are equivalent:

<!-- original page 115 -->

- a) The point $x$ is isolated in its fibre $f^{-1}(f(x))$.
- b) The ring $\mathcal{O}_{x}$ is a quasi-finite $\mathcal{O}_{f(x)}$-module `(0, 7.4.1)`.

**Proof.** Since the question is evidently local on $X$ and on $Y$, we may assume $X = \operatorname{Spec}(A)$ and $Y =
\operatorname{Spec}(B)$ affine, with $A$ a $B$-algebra of finite type `(I, 6.3.3)`. Moreover, we may replace $X$ by $X
\times_{Y} \operatorname{Spec}(\mathcal{O}_{f(x)})$ without changing the fibre $f^{-1}(f(x))$ or the local ring
$\mathcal{O}_{x}$ `(I, 3.6.5)`; we may therefore assume that $B$ is a local ring (equal to $\mathcal{O}_{f(x)}$); if
$\mathfrak{n}$ is the maximal ideal of $B$, then $f^{-1}(f(x))$ is an affine scheme of ring $A/\mathfrak{n}A$, of finite
type over $\kappa(f(x)) = B/\mathfrak{n}$ `(I, 6.4.11)`. This being so, if a) is satisfied, we may further assume that
$f^{-1}(f(x))$ is reduced to the point $x$; then $A/\mathfrak{n}A$ is of finite rank over $B/\mathfrak{n}$ `(I, 6.4.4)`,
that is, $A$ is a quasi-finite $B$-module. Conversely, if this is so, $f^{-1}(f(x))$ is an Artinian affine scheme, hence
discrete `(I, 6.4.4)`; consequently $x$ is isolated in its fibre, which shows that b) implies a).

**Corollary.**

<!-- label: II.6.2.2 -->

Let $f : X \to Y$ be a morphism of finite type. The following conditions are equivalent:

- a) Every point $x \in X$ is isolated in its fibre $f^{-1}(f(x))$ (in other words, the subspace $f^{-1}(f(x))$ is
  discrete).
- b) For every $x \in X$, the prescheme $f^{-1}(f(x))$ is a finite $\kappa(f(x))$-prescheme.
- c) For every $x \in X$, the ring $\mathcal{O}_{x}$ is a quasi-finite $\mathcal{O}_{f(x)}$-module.

**Proof.** The equivalence of a) and c) follows from (6.2.1). On the other hand, since $f^{-1}(f(x))$ is a
$\kappa(f(x))$-algebraic prescheme `(I, 6.4.11)`, the equivalence of a) and b) follows from `(I, 6.4.4)`.

**Definition.**

<!-- label: II.6.2.3 -->

When $f : X \to Y$ is a morphism of finite type satisfying the equivalent conditions of (6.2.2), we say that $f$ is
_quasi-finite_, or that $X$ is _quasi-finite over_ $Y$.

It is clear that every finite morphism is quasi-finite (6.1.8).

**Proposition.**

<!-- label: II.6.2.4 -->

- (i) An immersion $X \to Y$ which is closed, or such that $X$ is Noetherian, is a quasi-finite morphism.
- (ii) If $f : X \to Y$ and $g : Y \to Z$ are quasi-finite morphisms, then $g \circ f$ is quasi-finite.
- (iii) If $X$ and $Y$ are $S$-preschemes and $f : X \to Y$ a quasi-finite $S$-morphism, then $f_{(S')} : X_{(S')} \to
  Y_{(S')}$ is quasi-finite for every base extension $g : S' \to S$.
- (iv) If $f : X \to Y$ and $g : X' \to Y'$ are two quasi-finite $S$-morphisms, then
    ```text
      f ×_S g : X ×_S X' → Y ×_S Y'
    ```
    is quasi-finite.
- (v) Let $f : X \to Y$ and $g : Y \to Z$ be morphisms such that $g \circ f$ is quasi-finite; if, further, $g$ is
  separated, or $X$ is Noetherian, or $X \times_{Z} Y$ is locally Noetherian, then $f$ is quasi-finite.
- (vi) If $f$ is quasi-finite, so is $f_{red}$.

**Proof.** If $f : X \to Y$ is an immersion, then every fibre is reduced to a point, and assertion (i) therefore follows
from `(I, 6.3.4 (i)` and `6.3.5)`. To prove (ii), we remark first that $h = g \circ f$ is of finite type
`(I, 6.3.4 (ii))`; furthermore, if $z = h(x)$ and $y = f(x)$, then $y$ is isolated in $g^{-1}(z)$, so there exists an
open neighbourhood $V$ of $y$ in $Y$ meeting no point of $g^{-1}(z)$ other than $y$; therefore $f^{-1}(V)$ is an open
neighbourhood of $x$ meeting

<!-- original page 116 -->

none of the $f^{-1}(y')$, where $y' \neq y$ is in $g^{-1}(z)$; since $x$ is isolated in $f^{-1}(y)$, it is isolated in
$h^{-1}(z) = f^{-1}(g^{-1}(z))$. To prove (iii), we may restrict to the case $Y = S$ `(I, 3.3.11)`; we remark again
first that $f' = f_{(S')}$ is of finite type `(I, 6.3.4, (iii))`; on the other hand, if $x' \in X' = X_{(S')}$ and if we
set $y' = f'(x')$ and $y = g(y')$, then $f'^{-1}(y')$ is identified with $f^{-1}(y) \otimes_{\kappa(y)} \kappa(y')$
`(I, 3.6.5)`; since $f^{-1}(y)$ is of finite rank over $\kappa(y)$ by hypothesis, $f'^{-1}(y')$ is of finite rank over
$\kappa(y')$, hence discrete. The assertions (iv), (v), (vi) follow from (i), (ii), (iii) by the general method
`(I, 5.5.12)`, except when the hypotheses in (v) are other than "$g$ separated"; to treat this case, we remark first
that if $x$ is isolated in $f^{-1}(g^{-1}(g(f(x))))$, it is _a fortiori_ isolated in $f^{-1}(f(x))$; the fact that $f$
is of finite type then follows from `(I, 6.3.6)`.

**Proposition.**

<!-- label: II.6.2.5 -->

Let $A$ be a complete local Noetherian ring, $X$ an $A$-scheme locally of finite type, $x$ a point of $X$ over the
closed point $y$ of $Y = \operatorname{Spec}(A)$, and suppose that $x$ is isolated in its fibre $f^{-1}(y)$ (where $f$
is the structure morphism $X \to Y$). Then $\mathcal{O}_{x}$ is an $A$-module of finite type, and $X$ is $Y$-isomorphic
to the sum `(I, 3.1)` of $X' = \operatorname{Spec}(\mathcal{O}_{x})$ (which is a finite $Y$-scheme) and an $A$-scheme
`X''`.

**Proof.** It follows from (6.2.1) that $\mathcal{O}_{x}$ is a quasi-finite $A$-module. Since $\mathcal{O}_{x}$ is
Noetherian `(I, 6.3.7)` and the homomorphism $A \to \mathcal{O}_{x}$ is local, the hypothesis that $A$ is complete
implies that $\mathcal{O}_{x}$ is an $A$-module of finite type `(0, 7.4.3)`. Let $X' =
\operatorname{Spec}(\mathcal{O}_{x})$ be the local scheme of $X$ at the point $x$ `(I, 2.4.1)`, and let $g : X' \to X$
be the canonical morphism. Since the composite $X' \to X \to Y$ is finite (6.1.1) and $f$ is separated, $g$ is finite
(6.1.5, (v)), hence $g(X')$ is closed in $X$ (6.1.10); on the other hand, since $g$ is of finite type, $g$ is a local
isomorphism at the closed point $x'$ of $X'$ by the definition of $g$ and `(I, 6.5.4)`; but since $X'$ is the only open
neighbourhood of $x'$, this means that $g$ is an open immersion, hence $g(X')$ is also open in $X$, which completes the
proof.

**Corollary.**

<!-- label: II.6.2.6 -->

Let $A$ be a complete local Noetherian ring, $Y = \operatorname{Spec}(A)$, $f : X \to Y$ a separated quasi-finite
morphism. Then $X$ is $Y$-isomorphic to a sum $X' \sqcup X''$, where $X'$ is a finite $Y$-scheme and `X''` a
quasi-finite $Y$-scheme such that, if $y$ is the closed point of $Y$, $X'' \cap f^{-1}(y) = \emptyset$.

**Proof.** Indeed, the fibre $f^{-1}(y)$ is finite and discrete by hypothesis, and the corollary therefore follows, by
induction on the number of points of this fibre, from (6.2.5).

**Remark.**

<!-- label: II.6.2.7 -->

In Chapter V, we will see that if $Y$ is locally Noetherian, then a separated quasi-finite morphism $X \to Y$ is
necessarily quasi-affine.

## 6.3. Integral closure of a prescheme

**Proposition.**

<!-- label: II.6.3.1 -->

Let $(X, \mathcal{A})$ be a ringed space, $\mathcal{B}$ a (commutative) $\mathcal{A}$-algebra, $f$ a section of
$\mathcal{B}$ over $X$. The following properties are equivalent:

- a) The sub-$\mathcal{A}$-module of $\mathcal{B}$ generated by the $f^{n}$ for $n \geq 0$ `(0, 5.1.1)` is of finite
  type.
- b) There exists a sub-$\mathcal{A}$-algebra $\mathcal{C}$ of $\mathcal{B}$ that is an $\mathcal{A}$-module of finite
  type, such that $f \in \Gamma(X, \mathcal{C})$.
- c) For every $x \in X$, $f_{x}$ is integral over the fibre $\mathcal{A}_{x}$.

<!-- original page 117 -->

**Proof.** Since the sub-$\mathcal{A}$-module of $\mathcal{B}$ generated by the $f^{n}$ is an $\mathcal{A}$-algebra, it
is clear that a) implies b). On the other hand, b) implies that for every $x \in X$, the $\mathcal{A}_{x}$-module
$\mathcal{C}_{x}$ is of finite type, which implies that every element of the algebra $\mathcal{C}_{x}$, and in
particular $f_{x}$, is integral over $\mathcal{A}_{x}$. Finally, if for some $x \in X$ we have a relation of the form

```text
  f_x^n + (a₁)_x f_x^{n−1} + … + (a_n)_x = 0
```

where the $a_{i}$ ($1 \leq i \leq n$) are sections of $\mathcal{A}$ over an open neighbourhood $U$ of $x$, then the
section $f^{n}|U + a_{1} \cdot f^{n-1}|U + \cdots + a_{n}$ is zero over a neighbourhood $V \subset U$ of $x$, whence it
follows immediately that all the $f^{k}|V$ ($k \geq 0$) are linear combinations with coefficients in $\Gamma(V,
\mathcal{A})$ of the $f^{j}|V$ for $0 \leq j \leq n - 1$; we conclude that c) implies a).

When the equivalent conditions of (6.3.1) are satisfied, we say that the section $f$ is _integral over_ $\mathcal{A}$.

**Corollary.**

<!-- label: II.6.3.2 -->

Under the hypotheses of (6.3.1), there exists a (unique) sub-$\mathcal{A}$-module $\mathcal{A}'$ of $\mathcal{B}$ such
that, for every $x \in X$, $\mathcal{A}'_{x}$ is the set of germs $f_{x} \in \mathcal{B}_{x}$ that are integral over
$\mathcal{A}_{x}$. For every open $U \subset X$, the sections of $\mathcal{A}'$ over $U$ are the sections $f \in
\Gamma(U, \mathcal{B})$ that are integral over $\mathcal{A}|U$.

**Proof.** The existence of $\mathcal{A}'$ is immediate, by taking $\Gamma(U, \mathcal{A}')$ to be the set of $f \in
\Gamma(U, \mathcal{B})$ such that $f_{x}$ is integral over $\mathcal{A}_{x}$ for every $x \in U$. The second assertion
follows immediately from (6.3.1).

It is clear that $\mathcal{A}'$ is a sub-$\mathcal{A}$-algebra of $\mathcal{B}$; we say that it is the _integral closure
of_ $\mathcal{A}$ _in_ $\mathcal{B}$.

**(6.3.3)**

<!-- label: II.6.3.3 -->

Let $(X, \mathcal{A})$, $(Y, \mathcal{B})$ be two ringed spaces and

```text
  g = (ψ, θ) : X → Y
```

a morphism. Let $\mathcal{C}$ (resp. $\mathcal{D}$) be an $\mathcal{A}$-algebra (resp. a $\mathcal{B}$-algebra) and let

$$ u : \mathcal{D} \to \mathcal{C} $$

be a $g$-morphism `(0, 4.4.1)`. Then, if $\mathcal{C}'$ (resp. $\mathcal{B}'$) is the integral closure of $\mathcal{A}$
(resp. $\mathcal{B}$) in $\mathcal{C}$ (resp. $\mathcal{D}$), the restriction of $u$ to $\mathcal{B}'$ is a $g$-morphism

$$ u' : \mathcal{B}' \to \mathcal{C}'. $$

Indeed, if $j$ is the canonical injection $\mathcal{B}' \to \mathcal{D}$, it suffices to show that

```text
  v = u^♯ ∘ g*(j) : g*(ℬ') → 𝒞
```

sends $g*(\mathcal{B}')$ into $\mathcal{C}'$. Now, an element of $g*(\mathcal{B}')_{x} = \mathcal{B}'_{\psi(x)}
\otimes_{\mathcal{B}_{\psi(x)}} \mathcal{A}_{x}$ is integral over $\mathcal{A}_{x}$ by the definition of $\mathcal{B}'$,
hence so is its image under $v_{x}$, which establishes our assertion.

**Proposition.**

<!-- label: II.6.3.4 -->

Let $X$ be a prescheme, $\mathcal{A}$ a quasi-coherent $\mathcal{O}_{X}$-algebra. Then the integral closure
$\mathcal{O}'_{X}$ of $\mathcal{O}_{X}$ in $\mathcal{A}$ is a quasi-coherent $\mathcal{O}_{X}$-algebra, and for every
affine open $U$ of $X$, $\Gamma(U, \mathcal{O}'_{X})$ is the integral closure of $\Gamma(U, \mathcal{O}_{X})$ in
$\Gamma(U, \mathcal{A})$.

**Proof.** We may restrict to the case where $X = \operatorname{Spec}(B)$ is affine and $\mathcal{A} = \tilde{A}$, where
$A$ is a

<!-- original page 118 -->

$B$-algebra; let $B'$ be the integral closure of $B$ in $A$. Everything comes down to seeing that for every $x \in X$,
an element of $A_{x}$ integral over $B_{x}$ necessarily belongs to $B'_{x}$, which follows from the fact that, for a
commutative ring $C$, the operations of integral closure in a $C$-algebra and of passage to a ring of fractions (with
respect to a multiplicative part of $C$) commute ([13], t. I, p. 261 and 257).

The $X$-scheme $X' = \operatorname{Spec}(\mathcal{O}'_{X})$ is then called the _integral closure of_ $X$ _relative to_
$\mathcal{A}$ (or _relative to_ $\operatorname{Spec}(\mathcal{A})$); it is clear that $X'$ is integral over $X$ (6.1.2).

We immediately deduce from (6.3.4) that if $f : X' \to X$ is the structure morphism, then, for every open $U$ of $X$,
$f^{-1}(U)$ is the integral closure of the prescheme induced by $X$ on $U$, relative to $\mathcal{A}|U$.

**(6.3.5)**

<!-- label: II.6.3.5 -->

Let $X$, $Y$ be two preschemes, $f : X \to Y$ a morphism, $\mathcal{A}$ (resp. $\mathcal{B}$) a quasi-coherent
$\mathcal{O}_{X}$-algebra (resp. quasi-coherent $\mathcal{O}_{Y}$-algebra), and let $u : \mathcal{B} \to \mathcal{A}$ be
an $f$-morphism. We have seen (6.3.3) that one deduces from it an $f$-morphism $u' : \mathcal{O}'_{Y} \to
\mathcal{O}'_{X}$, where $\mathcal{O}'_{X}$ (resp. $\mathcal{O}'_{Y}$) is the integral closure of $\mathcal{O}_{X}$
(resp. $\mathcal{O}_{Y}$) in $\mathcal{A}$ (resp. $\mathcal{B}$). Consequently, if $X'$ (resp. $Y'$) is the integral
closure of $X$ (resp. $Y$) relative to $\mathcal{A}$ (resp. $\mathcal{B}$), one canonically deduces from $u$ a morphism
$f' = \operatorname{Spec}(u') : X' \to Y'$ (1.5.6) making the diagram

```text
  X' ─────f'────→ Y'
  │                │                                                       (6.3.5.1)
  ↓                ↓
  X ──────f─────→ Y
```

commute.

**(6.3.6)**

<!-- label: II.6.3.6 -->

Suppose that $X$ has only a finite number of irreducible components $X_{i}$ ($1 \leq i \leq r$), with generic points
$\xi_{i}$, and consider in particular the integral closure of $X$ relative to a quasi-coherent $\mathcal{R}(X)$-algebra
$\mathcal{A}$ (quasi-coherent as an $\mathcal{O}_{X}$-algebra or as an $\mathcal{R}(X)$-algebra, which amounts to the
same thing). We know `(I, 7.3.5)` that $\mathcal{A}$ is a direct sum of $r$ quasi-coherent $\mathcal{O}_{X}$-algebras
$\mathcal{A}_{i}$, with the support of $\mathcal{A}_{i}$ contained in $X_{i}$, and the sheaf induced by
$\mathcal{A}_{i}$ on $X_{i}$ being a simple sheaf whose fibre $A_{i}$ is an algebra over $\mathcal{O}_{\xi_{i}}$. It is
then clear (6.3.4) that the integral closure $\mathcal{O}'_{X}$ of $\mathcal{O}_{X}$ in $\mathcal{A}$ is the direct sum
of the integral closures $\mathcal{O}^{(i)}_{X}$ of $\mathcal{O}_{X}$ in each of the $\mathcal{A}_{i}$, and consequently
the integral closure $X' = \operatorname{Spec}(\mathcal{O}'_{X})$ of $X$ relative to $\mathcal{A}$ is an $X$-scheme that
is the sum of the $\operatorname{Spec}(\mathcal{O}^{(i)}_{X}) = X'_{i}$ ($1 \leq i \leq r$).

Suppose further that the $\mathcal{O}_{X}$-algebra $\mathcal{A}$ is reduced, or, equivalently, that each of the algebras
$A_{i}$ is reduced, and hence may be considered as an algebra over the field $\kappa(\xi_{i})$ (equal to the field of
rational functions of the reduced subprescheme of $X$ having $X_{i}$ as its underlying space); then (1.3.8) each of the
$X'_{i}$ is a reduced $X$-scheme and $X'$ is also the integral closure of $X_{red}$. Suppose moreover that each of the
algebras $A_{i}$ is a direct sum of a finite number of fields $K_{ij}$ ($1 \leq j \leq s_{i}$); if $\mathcal{K}_{ij}$ is
the sub-algebra of $\mathcal{A}_{i}$ corresponding to $K_{ij}$, it is clear that $\mathcal{O}^{(i)}_{X}$ is the direct
sum of the integral closures $\mathcal{O}^{(ij)}_{X}$ of $\mathcal{O}_{X}$ in each of the $\mathcal{K}_{ij}$.
Consequently, $X'_{i}$ is then the sum of the $X$-schemes $X'_{ij} = \operatorname{Spec}(\mathcal{O}^{(ij)}_{X})$ ($1
\leq j \leq s_{i}$). Furthermore, under these hypotheses and with this notation:

<!-- original page 119 -->

**Proposition.**

<!-- label: II.6.3.7 -->

Each of the $X'_{ij}$ is an integral normal $X$-prescheme, and its field of rational functions $R(X'_{ij})$ is
canonically identified with the algebraic closure $K'_{ij}$ of $\kappa(\xi_{i})$ in $K_{ij}$.

**Proof.** By the above, we may assume $X$ integral, so $r = 1$ and $s_{1} = 1$, so that the unique algebra `A_1` is a
field $K$; let $\xi$ be the generic point of $X$, and let $f : X' \to X$ be the structure morphism. For every non-empty
affine open $U$ of $X$, $f^{-1}(U)$ is identified with the spectrum of the integral closure $B'_{U}$ in the field $K$ of
the integral ring $B_{U} = \Gamma(U, \mathcal{O}_{X})$ (6.3.4); since the ring $B'_{U}$ is integral and integrally
closed, so are the local rings of the points of its spectrum, hence $f^{-1}(U)$ is by definition an integral and normal
scheme (`(0, 4.1.4)` and `(I, 5.1.4)`). Moreover, since `(0)` is the only prime ideal of $B'_{U}$ above the prime ideal
`(0)` of `B_U` ([13], t. I, p. 259), $f^{-1}(\xi)$ reduces to a single point $\xi'$, and $\kappa(\xi')$ is the field of
fractions $K'$ of $B'_{U}$, which is none other than the algebraic closure of $\kappa(\xi)$ in $K$. Finally, $X'$ is
irreducible, because as $U$ runs over the non-empty affine opens of $X$, the $f^{-1}(U)$ constitute an open cover of
$X'$ by irreducible opens; moreover, the intersection $f^{-1}(U \cap V)$ of two such opens contains $\xi'$, hence is
non-empty, and we conclude by `(0, 2.1.4)`.

**Corollary.**

<!-- label: II.6.3.8 -->

Let $X$ be a reduced prescheme having only a finite number of irreducible components $X_{i}$ ($1 \leq i \leq r$), and
let $\xi_{i}$ be the generic point of $X_{i}$. The integral closure $X'$ of $X$ relative to $\mathcal{R}(X)$ is the sum
of $r$ $X$-schemes $X'_{i}$ which are integral and normal. If $f : X' \to X$ is the structure morphism, then
$f^{-1}(\xi_{i})$ reduces to the generic point $\xi'_{i}$ of $X'_{i}$ and we have $\kappa(\xi'_{i}) = \kappa(\xi_{i})$;
in other words, $f$ is birational.

In this case we say that $X'$ is the _normalisation_ of the reduced prescheme $X$; note that $f$, being birational and
integral, is surjective (6.1.10). In order to have $X' = X$, it is necessary and sufficient that $X$ be normal. When $X$
is an integral prescheme, it follows from (6.3.8) that its normalisation $X'$ is integral.

**(6.3.9)**

<!-- label: II.6.3.9 -->

Let $X$, $Y$ be two integral preschemes, $f : X \to Y$ a dominant morphism, $L = R(X)$, $K = R(Y)$ the fields of
rational functions of $X$ and $Y$; there canonically corresponds to $f$ an injection $K \to L$, and when we identify $K$
(resp. $L$) with the simple sheaf $\mathcal{R}(Y)$ (resp. $\mathcal{R}(X)$), this injection is an $f$-morphism. Let
$K_{1}$ (resp. $L_{1}$) be an extension of $K$ (resp. $L$) and suppose given a monomorphism $K_{1} \to L_{1}$ such that
the diagram

```text
  K₁ ────→ L₁
  ↑         ↑
  K ─────→ L
```

commutes; if $K_{1}$ (resp. $L_{1}$) is considered as a simple sheaf on $Y$ (resp. $X$), hence as an
$\mathcal{R}(Y)$-algebra (resp. an $\mathcal{R}(X)$-algebra), this means that $K_{1} \to L_{1}$ is an $f$-morphism. With
this, if $X'$ (resp. $Y'$) is the integral closure of $X$ (resp. $Y$) relative to $L_{1}$ (resp. $K_{1}$), then $X'$
(resp. $Y'$) is an integral normal prescheme (6.3.6) whose field of rational functions is canonically identified with
the algebraic closure $L'$ (resp. $K'$)

<!-- original page 120 -->

of $L$ (resp. $K$) in $L_{1}$ (resp. $K_{1}$), and there exists a canonical (necessarily dominant) morphism $f' : X' \to
Y'$ making the diagram (6.3.5.1) commute.

The most important case is that in which one takes $L_{1} = L$, so $K_{1}$ is then an extension of $K$ contained in $L$,
and one supposes $X$ integral and normal, hence $X' = X$. What precedes then shows that when $X$ is normal, and $Y'$ is
the integral closure of $Y$ relative to a field $K_{1} \subset L = R(X)$, every dominant morphism $f : X \to Y$ factors
as

```text
  f : X →^{f'} Y' → Y
```

where $f'$ is dominant; moreover, when the monomorphism $K_{1} \to L$ is given, $f'$ is necessarily unique, as one sees
by reducing to the case where $X$ and $Y$ are affine. We thus see that, for the data of $Y$, $L$, and a $K$-monomorphism
$K_{1} \to L$, the integral closure $Y'$ of $Y$ relative to $K_{1}$ is the solution of a universal problem.

**Remark.**

<!-- label: II.6.3.10 -->

Let us take up the hypotheses of (6.3.6), supposing further that each of the algebras $A_{i}$ is of finite rank over
$\kappa(\xi_{i})$ (which implies that $A_{i}$ is a direct sum of a finite number of fields); we can assert in certain
cases that the structure morphism $X' \to X$ is not only integral, but even finite. Let us restrict to the case where
$X$ is reduced; since the question is local on $X$, we may further assume that $X$ is affine of ring $C$, and that $C$
has only a finite number of minimal ideals $\mathfrak{p}_{i}$ ($1 \leq i \leq r$) such that the $C_{i} =
C/\mathfrak{p}_{i}$ are integral; then $X'$ will be finite over $X$ if the integral closure of each $C_{i}$ in every
extension of finite degree of its field of fractions is a $C$-module of finite type (6.3.4). We know that this condition
is always satisfied when $C$ is an algebra of finite type over a field ([13], t. I, p. 267, th. 9), or over $\mathbb{Z}$
([9, I, p. 93, th. 3]), or over a complete local Noetherian ring ([25], p. 298). We conclude that $X' \to X$ will be a
finite morphism whenever $X$ is a scheme of finite type over a field, over $\mathbb{Z}$, or over a complete local
Noetherian ring.

## 6.4. Determinant of an endomorphism of an $\mathcal{O}_{X}$-module

**(6.4.1)**

<!-- label: II.6.4.1 -->

Let $A$ be a (commutative) ring, $E$ a free $A$-module of rank $n$, $u$ an endomorphism of $E$; we recall that to define
the _characteristic polynomial_ of $u$, one considers the endomorphism $u \otimes 1$ of the free `A[T]`-module of rank
$n$, $E \otimes_{A} A[T]$ ($T$ an indeterminate), and one sets

```text
  P(u, T) = det(T · I − (u ⊗ 1))                                            (6.4.1.1)
```

($I$ the identity automorphism of $E \otimes_{A} A[T]$). We have

```text
  P(u, T) = T^n − σ₁(u) T^{n−1} + … + (−1)^n σ_n(u)                         (6.4.1.2)
```

where $\sigma_{i}(u)$ is an element of $A$, equal to a homogeneous polynomial of degree $i$ (with integer coefficients)
in the entries of the matrix of $u$ relative to an arbitrary basis of $E$; we say that the $\sigma_{i}(u)$ are the
_elementary symmetric functions_ of $u$, and in particular we have $\sigma_{1}(u) = Tr u$ and $\sigma_{n}(u) = det u$.
Recall that, by the Hamilton–Cayley theorem, we have

```text
  P(u, u) = u^n − σ₁(u) u^{n−1} + … + (−1)^n σ_n(u) = 0                     (6.4.1.3)
```

<!-- original page 121 -->

which can also be written as

```text
  (det u) · I_E = u · Q(u)                                                  (6.4.1.4)
```

(`I_E` the identity automorphism of $E$), with

```text
  Q(u) = (−1)^{n+1} (u^{n−1} − σ₁(u) u^{n−2} + … + (−1)^{n−1} σ_{n−1}(u)).  (6.4.1.5)
```

Let $\phi : A \to B$ be a ring homomorphism, making $B$ an $A$-algebra; consider the $B$-module $E_{(B)} = E \otimes_{A}
B$, which is free of rank $n$, and the extension $u \otimes 1$ of $u$ to an endomorphism of $E_{(B)}$; it is immediate
that one has $\sigma_{i}(u \otimes 1) = \phi(\sigma_{i}(u))$ for every index $i$.

**(6.4.2)**

<!-- label: II.6.4.2 -->

Now suppose that $A$ is an integral ring, with field of fractions $K$, and let $E$ be an $A$-module of finite type (but
not necessarily free). Let $n$ be the _rank_ of $E$, i.e. the rank of the free $K$-module $E \otimes_{A} K$; to every
endomorphism $u$ of $E$ canonically corresponds the endomorphism $u \otimes 1$ of $E \otimes_{A} K$; by abuse of
language, we still call _characteristic polynomial_ of $u$, and denote by $P(u, T)$, the polynomial $P(u \otimes 1, T)$,
whose coefficients $\sigma_{i}(u \otimes 1)$ (which belong to $K$) we also denote by $\sigma_{i}(u)$ and call the
_elementary symmetric functions_ of $u$; in particular $det u = det(u \otimes 1)$ by definition. With this notation,
formulas (6.4.1.3) to (6.4.1.5) make sense and remain valid, provided one interprets $u^{j}$ as the homomorphism $E \to
E \otimes_{A} K$ obtained by composing the endomorphism $u^{j} \otimes 1 = (u \otimes 1)^{j}$ of $E \otimes_{A} K$ with
the canonical homomorphism $x \mapsto x \otimes 1$.

If $F$ is the torsion submodule of $E$ and if $E_{0} = E/F$, then $u(F) \subset F$, hence, by passage to quotients, $u$
gives an endomorphism $u_{0}$ of $E_{0}$; moreover, $E \otimes_{A} K$ is identified with $E_{0} \otimes_{A} K$ and $u
\otimes 1$ with $u_{0} \otimes 1$, hence $\sigma_{i}(u) = \sigma_{i}(u_{0})$ for $1 \leq i \leq n$.

When $E$ is torsion-free, $E$ is canonically identified with a sub-$A$-module of $E \otimes_{A} K$, and the relation $u
\otimes 1 = 0$ is equivalent to $u = 0$. When $E$ is a free $A$-module, the two definitions of $\sigma_{i}(u)$ given in
(6.4.1) and (6.4.2) coincide by the above, which justifies the notation adopted.

Note also that when $E$ is a torsion module — in other words, $E_{0} = {0}$ — the exterior algebra of $E_{0}$ reduces to
$K$ and the determinant of the unique endomorphism $u_{0}$ of $E_{0}$ is _equal to_ `1`.

**Proposition.**

<!-- label: II.6.4.3 -->

Let $A$ be an integral ring, $E$ an $A$-module of finite type, $u$ an endomorphism of $E$; then the elementary symmetric
functions $\sigma_{i}(u)$ of $u$ (and in particular `det u`) are elements of $K$ integral over $A$.

**Proof.** Let $A'$ be the integral closure of $A$; since `A'[T]` is an integrally closed ring ([24], p. 99), it is the
integral closure of `A[T]` in its field of fractions $K(T)$. Replacing $u$ by $T \cdot I - u \otimes 1$ and $A$ by
`A[T]`, we see that we are reduced to proving that `det u` is integral over $A$. If $n$ is the rank of $E$, we have $det
u = det(\bigwedge^{n} u)$ and $(\bigwedge^{n} u) \otimes 1 = \bigwedge^{n}(u \otimes 1)$, so we may assume $n = 1$. But
then the map $u \mapsto det u$ is a homomorphism from the $A$-module $\operatorname{Hom}_{A}(E, E)$ to $K$; since $E$ is
of finite type, $\operatorname{Hom}_{A}(E, E)$ is isomorphic to a sub-$A$-module of the $A$-module of finite type
$E^{n}$ (if $E$ admits a system of $n$ generators), so the elements `det u` belong to a sub-$A$-module of $K$ of finite
type, and are consequently integral over $A$.

<!-- original page 122 -->

**Corollary.**

<!-- label: II.6.4.4 -->

Under the hypotheses of (6.4.3), if we further suppose $A$ normal, then the $\sigma_{i}(u)$ (in particular `Tr u` and
`det u`) belong to $A$.

**Proposition.**

<!-- label: II.6.4.5 -->

Let $A$ be an integral ring, $E$ an $A$-module of finite type of rank $n$, $u$ an endomorphism of $E$ such that the
$\sigma_{i}(u)$ belong to $A$. For $u$ to be an automorphism of $E$, it is necessary that `det u` be invertible in $A$;
this condition is sufficient when $E$ is torsion-free.

**Proof.** The condition is sufficient, since the hypothesis and the formulas (6.4.1.4) and (6.4.1.5) (valid in $E$, and
not only in $E \otimes_{A} K$, since $E$ is torsion-free) prove that $(det u)^{-1} Q(u)$ is the inverse of $u$.

The condition is necessary, since if $u$ is invertible, it follows from (6.4.3) that $det(u^{-1})$ belongs to the
integral closure $A'$ of $A$ in its field of fractions $K$, and is evidently the inverse of `det u` _in_ $A'$. Our
assertion then follows from:

**Lemma.**

<!-- label: II.6.4.5.1 -->

Let $A$ be a subring of a ring $A'$ such that $A'$ is integral over $A$. If an element $x \in A$ is invertible in $A'$,
it is also invertible in $A$.

**Proof.** In the contrary case, $x$ would belong to a maximal ideal $\mathfrak{m}$ of $A$, and it follows from the
first theorem of Cohen–Seidenberg ([13], t. I, p. 257, th. 3) that there would be a maximal ideal $\mathfrak{m}'$ of
$A'$ such that $\mathfrak{m} = \mathfrak{m}' \cap A$; we would then have $x \in \mathfrak{m}'$, which is absurd.

**Corollary.**

<!-- label: II.6.4.6 -->

Let $A$ be an integral and integrally closed ring, $E$ a torsion-free $A$-module of finite type, $u$ an endomorphism of
$E$. For $u$ to be an automorphism of $E$, it is necessary and sufficient that `det u` be invertible in $A$.

**Proof.** This follows from (6.4.4) and (6.4.5).

**Remark.**

<!-- label: II.6.4.7 -->

We will need below a generalisation of the preceding results. Consider a reduced Noetherian ring $A$; let
$\mathfrak{p}_{\alpha}$ ($1 \leq \alpha \leq r$) be its minimal ideals, $K_{\alpha}$ the field of fractions of the
integral ring $A/\mathfrak{p}_{\alpha}$, $K$ the total ring of fractions of $A$, the direct sum of the fields
$K_{\alpha}$. Let $E$ be an $A$-module of finite type, and suppose that $E \otimes_{A} K$ is a free $K$-module of rank
$n$ (which here is no longer a consequence of the other hypotheses); it amounts to the same to say that all the
$K_{\alpha}$-vector spaces $E \otimes_{A} K_{\alpha} = E_{\alpha}$ have the same dimension $n$; if then $u$ is an
endomorphism of $E$, we again set $P(u, T) = P(u \otimes 1, T)$ and $\sigma_{j}(u) = \sigma_{j}(u \otimes 1)$, and in
particular $det u = det(u \otimes 1)$; the $\sigma_{j}(u)$ are thus elements of $K$. It is immediate that $E \otimes_{A}
K$ is the direct sum of the $E_{\alpha}$ and that the latter are stable under $u \otimes 1$; the restriction of $u
\otimes 1$ to $E_{\alpha}$ is in fact the extension $u_{\alpha}$ of $u$ to this $K_{\alpha}$-vector space; we deduce
that $\sigma_{j}(u)$ is the element of $K$ whose components in the $K_{\alpha}$ are the $\sigma_{j}(u_{\alpha})$. Since
the integral closure of $A$ in $K$ is the direct sum of the integral closures of $A$ in the $K_{\alpha}$, the
$\sigma_{j}(u)$ are integral over $A$.

**Lemma.**

<!-- label: II.6.4.7.1 -->

The sub-$A$-algebra of $K$ generated by all the elements $\sigma_{j}(u)$ ($1 \leq j \leq n$), as $u$ runs over
$\operatorname{Hom}_{A}(E, E)$, is an $A$-module of finite type.

**Proof.** It suffices to prove that the sub-`A[T]`-algebra of `K[T]` generated by the $P(u, T)$ is an `A[T]`-module of
finite type, since if the $F_{i}(T)$ ($1 \leq i \leq m$) form a system of generators of this `A[T]`-module, then the
coefficients of the $F_{i}(T)$ are integral over $A$, hence generate an $A$-algebra which is an $A$-module of finite
type ([13], t. I, p. 255, th. 1). We may therefore

<!-- original page 123 -->

replace $A$ by `A[T]` (which is Noetherian) and $E$ by $E \otimes_{A} A[T] = E'$, which is such that $E' \otimes_{A[T]}
K[T] = E \otimes_{A} K[T]$ is a free `K[T]`-module of rank $n$. Returning to the initial notation, we therefore see that
it suffices to prove that the $A$-module generated by the elements `det u`, as $u$ runs over $\operatorname{Hom}_{A}(E,
E)$, is of finite type; _a fortiori_ (since every submodule of an $A$-module of finite type is of finite type) it
suffices to prove that as $v$ runs over the set of endomorphisms of $\bigwedge^{n} E$, the $A$-module generated by the
`det v` is of finite type; in other words, we are again reduced to the case $n = 1$. But then the proposition follows
from the fact that $\operatorname{Hom}_{A}(E, E)$ is an $A$-module of finite type, and that $v \mapsto det v$ is a
homomorphism from this $A$-module to $K$.

Let $F$ be the kernel of the canonical homomorphism $E \to E \otimes_{A} K$ and let $E_{0} = E/F$; we see as above that
$E \otimes_{A} K$ is identified with $E_{0} \otimes_{A} K$, that $u(F) \subset F$, and that if $u_{0}$ is the
endomorphism of $E_{0}$ deduced from $u$ by passage to quotients, then $u \otimes 1$ is identified with $u_{0} \otimes
1$, and $\sigma_{j}(u) = \sigma_{j}(u_{0})$ for every $j$. _If we have_ $F = 0$, then formulas (6.4.1.3) and (6.4.1.5)
make sense and remain valid when $E$ is identified with a submodule of $E \otimes_{A} K$ and the $u^{j}$ with
homomorphisms $E \to E \otimes_{A} K$; consequently, Proposition (6.4.5) also extends to this case, with the same proof.

**(6.4.8)**

<!-- label: II.6.4.8 -->

Let $(X, \mathcal{A})$ be a ringed space, $\mathcal{E}$ a locally free $\mathcal{A}$-module (of finite rank), $u$ an
endomorphism of $\mathcal{E}$. There exists by hypothesis a base $\mathfrak{B}$ of the topology of $X$ such that for
every $V \in \mathfrak{B}$, $\mathcal{E}|V$ is isomorphic to $\mathcal{A}^{n}|V$ (for some $n$ that may vary with $V$).
Let $u$ be an endomorphism of $\mathcal{E}$; for every $V \in \mathfrak{B}$, $u_{V}$ is thus an endomorphism of the
$\Gamma(V, \mathcal{A})$-module $\Gamma(V, \mathcal{E})$, which is free by hypothesis; the determinant $det u_{V}$ is
therefore defined and belongs to $\Gamma(V, \mathcal{A})$. Moreover, if $e_{1}, \cdots, e_{n}$ form a basis of
$\Gamma(V, \mathcal{E})$, their restrictions to any open $W \subset V$ form a basis of $\Gamma(W, \mathcal{E})$ over
$\Gamma(W, \mathcal{A})$, so $det u_{W}$ is the restriction of $det u_{V}$ to $W$. There exists therefore a unique
section of $\mathcal{A}$ over $X$, which we denote by `det u` and call the _determinant_ of $u$, such that the
restriction of `det u` to every $V \in \mathfrak{B}$ is $det u_{V}$. It is clear that for every $x \in X$ we have $(det
u)_{x} = det u_{x}$; for two endomorphisms $u$, $v$ of $\mathcal{E}$, we have

```text
  det(v ∘ u) = (det v)(det u)                                               (6.4.8.1)
```

as well as

$$ det(1_{\mathcal{E}}) = 1_{\mathcal{A}} (6.4.8.2) $$

and, if the rank of $\mathcal{E}$ is constant (which will be the case `(0, 5.4.1)` if $X$ is connected) and equal to
$n$,

```text
  det(s · u) = s^n det u                                                    (6.4.8.3)
```

for every $s \in \Gamma(X, \mathcal{A})$ (note that $det(0) = 0_{\mathcal{A}}$ if $n \geq 1$, but $det(0) =
1_{\mathcal{A}}$ for $n = 0$). Moreover, for $u$ to be an automorphism of $\mathcal{E}$, it is necessary and sufficient
that `det u` be invertible in $\Gamma(X, \mathcal{A})$.

If the rank of $\mathcal{E}$ is constant, one can define in the same way the _elementary symmetric functions_
$\sigma_{i}(u)$, which are elements of $\Gamma(X, \mathcal{A})$; the relations (6.4.1.3) to (6.4.1.5) still hold.

<!-- original page 124 -->

We have thus defined a homomorphism $det : \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal{A}}(\mathcal{E}, \mathcal{E}) \to \Gamma(X,
\mathcal{A})$ of multiplicative monoids; if we note that $\operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal{A}}(\mathcal{E}, \mathcal{E}) =
\Gamma(X, \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal{A}}(\mathcal{E}, \mathcal{E}))$ by definition, we see that we can replace $X$ in
this definition by an arbitrary open $U$ of $X$, which immediately defines a homomorphism $det :
\operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal{A}}(\mathcal{E}, \mathcal{E}) \to \mathcal{A}$ of sheaves of multiplicative monoids. When
$\mathcal{E}$ has constant rank, one similarly defines homomorphisms $\sigma_{i} :
\operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal{A}}(\mathcal{E}, \mathcal{E}) \to \mathcal{A}$ of sheaves of sets; for $i = 1$, the
homomorphism $\sigma_{1} = Tr$ is a homomorphism of $\mathcal{A}$-modules.

Let $(Y, \mathcal{B})$ be a second ringed space, and let $f : (X, \mathcal{A}) \to (Y, \mathcal{B})$ be a morphism of
ringed spaces; if $\mathcal{F}$ is a locally free $\mathcal{B}$-module, then $f*(\mathcal{F})$ is a locally free
$\mathcal{A}$-module (of the same rank as $\mathcal{F}$ if the latter is of constant rank) `(0, 5.4.5)`. For every
endomorphism $v$ of $\mathcal{F}$, $f*(v)$ is an endomorphism of $f*(\mathcal{F})$, and it follows immediately from the
definitions that $det f*(v)$ is the section of $\mathcal{A} = f*(\mathcal{B})$ over $X$ which canonically corresponds to
$det v \in \Gamma(Y, \mathcal{B})$. We can also say that the homomorphism $f*(det) :
f*(\operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal{B}}(\mathcal{F}, \mathcal{F})) \to f*(\mathcal{B}) = \mathcal{A}$ is the composite

```text
  f*(𝓗𝓸𝓶_ℬ(ℱ, ℱ)) →^{γ^♯} 𝓗𝓸𝓶_𝒜(f*(ℱ), f*(ℱ)) →^{det} 𝒜
```

`(0, 4.4.6)`. We have analogous results for the $\sigma_{i}$.

**(6.4.9)**

<!-- label: II.6.4.9 -->

Suppose now that $X$ is a locally integral prescheme, so that the sheaf $\mathcal{R}(X)$ of rational functions on $X$ is
a locally simple sheaf of fields `(I, 7.3.4)`, quasi-coherent as an $\mathcal{O}_{X}$-module. If $\mathcal{E}$ is a
quasi-coherent $\mathcal{O}_{X}$-module of finite type, then $\mathcal{E}' = \mathcal{E} \otimes_{\mathcal{O}_{X}}
\mathcal{R}(X)$ is a locally free $\mathcal{R}(X)$-module `(I, 7.3.6)`; for every endomorphism $u$ of $\mathcal{E}$, $u
\otimes 1_{\mathcal{R}(X)}$ is then an endomorphism of $\mathcal{E}'$, and $det(u \otimes 1)$ is a section of
$\mathcal{R}(X)$ over $X$, which we still call _determinant_ of $u$ and still denote by `det u`. It follows from (6.4.3)
that `det u` is a section of the integral closure of $\mathcal{O}_{X}$ in $\mathcal{R}(X)$ (6.3.2); if, further, $X$ is
normal, then `det u` is a section of $\mathcal{O}_{X}$ over $X$, and if we further suppose that $\mathcal{E}$ is
torsion-free, for $u$ to be an automorphism of $\mathcal{E}$, it is necessary and sufficient that `det u` be invertible,
by virtue of (6.4.6). The formulas (6.4.8.1) to (6.4.8.3) still hold; from the homomorphism $u \mapsto det u$, applied
to the modules of sections of $\operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal{O}_{X}}(\mathcal{E}, \mathcal{E})$, one deduces a
homomorphism of sheaves $det : \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal{O}_{X}}(\mathcal{E}, \mathcal{E}) \to \mathcal{R}(X)$, which
takes its values in $\mathcal{O}_{X}$ when $X$ is normal. We have analogous definitions and results for the other
elementary symmetric functions $\sigma_{j}(u)$ when $\mathcal{E}'$ is of constant rank; if moreover $X$ is normal, the
$\sigma_{j}(u)$ are sections of $\mathcal{O}_{X}$ over $X$.

Finally, let $X$, $Y$ be two integral preschemes, and let $f : X \to Y$ be a dominant morphism. We know that there then
exists a canonical homomorphism $f*(\mathcal{R}(Y)) \to \mathcal{R}(X)$ `(I, 7.3.8)`, whence we obtain, for every
quasi-coherent $\mathcal{O}_{Y}$-module $\mathcal{F}$ of finite type, a canonical homomorphism $\theta : f*(\mathcal{F}
\otimes_{\mathcal{O}_{Y}} \mathcal{R}(Y)) \to f*(\mathcal{F}) \otimes_{\mathcal{O}_{X}} \mathcal{R}(X)$. If $v$ is an

<!-- original page 125 -->

endomorphism of $\mathcal{F}$, then $f*(v \otimes 1_{\mathcal{R}(Y)})$ is an endomorphism of $f*(\mathcal{F}
\otimes_{\mathcal{O}_{Y}} \mathcal{R}(Y))$, and one has a commutative diagram

```text
  f*(ℱ ⊗_{𝒪_Y} ℛ(Y)) ─────f*(v⊗1)────→ f*(ℱ ⊗_{𝒪_Y} ℛ(Y))
        │                                       │
       θ↓                                      θ↓
  f*(ℱ) ⊗_{𝒪_X} ℛ(X) ───f*(v)⊗1────→ f*(ℱ) ⊗_{𝒪_X} ℛ(X)
```

One then concludes easily that $det f*(v)$ is the canonical image, under the homomorphism $f*(\mathcal{R}(Y)) \to
\mathcal{R}(X)$, of the section `det v` of $\mathcal{R}(Y)$; indeed, one reduces immediately to the case where $X =
\operatorname{Spec}(A)$ and $Y = \operatorname{Spec}(B)$ are affine, $A$ and $B$ being integral rings with fields of
fractions $K$ and $L$ respectively, the homomorphism $B \to A$ being injective and extending therefore to a monomorphism
$L \to K$; if $\mathcal{F} = \tilde{M}$, where $M$ is a $B$-module of finite type, the rank over $L$ of $M \otimes_{B}
L$ is equal to that of $(M \otimes_{B} A) \otimes_{A} K$ over $K$, and $det((u \otimes 1) \otimes 1)$ is the image in
$K$ of $det(u \otimes 1)$ for every endomorphism $u$ of $M$, whence the conclusion.

**(6.4.10)**

<!-- label: II.6.4.10 -->

Suppose finally that $X$ is a locally Noetherian reduced prescheme, so that the sheaf $\mathcal{R}(X)$ of rational
functions on $X$ is again a quasi-coherent $\mathcal{O}_{X}$-module `(I, 7.3.4)`; let furthermore $\mathcal{E}$ be a
coherent $\mathcal{O}_{X}$-module such that $\mathcal{E}' = \mathcal{E} \otimes_{\mathcal{O}_{X}} \mathcal{R}(X)$ is
locally free (of finite rank). By virtue of (6.4.7), if $\mathcal{E}'$ is of constant rank, we can, for every
endomorphism $u$ of $\mathcal{E}$, define the $\sigma_{j}(u)$, which are sections of $\mathcal{R}(X)$ over $X$. When
$\mathcal{E}'$ is no longer assumed of constant rank, we can still define the homomorphism $det :
\operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal{O}_{X}}(\mathcal{E}, \mathcal{E}) \to \mathcal{R}(X)$.

## 6.5. Norm of an invertible sheaf

**(6.5.1)**

<!-- label: II.6.5.1 -->

Let $(X, \mathcal{A})$ be a ringed space and let $\mathcal{B}$ be a (commutative) $\mathcal{A}$-algebra. The
$\mathcal{A}$-module $\mathcal{B}$ is canonically identified with a sub-$\mathcal{A}$-module of
$\operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal{A}}(\mathcal{B}, \mathcal{B})$, a section $f$ of $\mathcal{B}$ over an open $U$ of $X$
being identified with multiplication by this section. If $(X, \mathcal{A})$ and $\mathcal{B}$ satisfy one of the
conditions enumerated in (6.4.8), (6.4.9), or (6.4.10), we can therefore define $det(f)$ (and in certain cases the
$\sigma_{j}(f)$), which are sections of $\mathcal{A}$ or of $\mathcal{R}(X)$ over $U$, which we shall call the _norm_ of
$f$ (resp. the _elementary symmetric functions_ of $f$) and denote by $N_{\mathcal{B}/\mathcal{A}}(f)$. We shall suppose
that one of the following conditions is satisfied:

- (I) $\mathcal{B}$ _is a locally free $\mathcal{A}$-module (of finite rank)._
- (II) $(X, \mathcal{A})$ _is a locally Noetherian reduced prescheme, $\mathcal{B}$ is a coherent $\mathcal{A}$-module
  such that $\mathcal{B} \otimes_{\mathcal{A}} \mathcal{R}(X)$ is a locally free $\mathcal{R}(X)$-module, and, for every
  section_ $f \in \Gamma(U, \mathcal{B})$ _over an open $U \subset X$, $N_{\mathcal{B}/\mathcal{A}}(f)$ is a section of
  $\mathcal{A}$ over $U$._

<!-- original page 126 -->

Note that this last condition is automatically satisfied when the locally Noetherian prescheme $X$ is normal (6.4.9).

On the other hand, the hypothesis that $\mathcal{B} \otimes_{\mathcal{A}} \mathcal{R}(X)$ is locally free can also be
expressed as follows: denote by $X_{\alpha}$ the closed reduced subpreschemes of $X$ having as their underlying spaces
the irreducible components of $X$ `(I, 5.2.1)`, which are therefore locally Noetherian integral preschemes. Every $x \in
X$ belongs to a finite number of the subspaces $X_{\alpha}$; on the other hand, $\mathcal{B} \otimes_{\mathcal{A}}
\mathcal{R}(X_{\alpha})$ is a locally free $\mathcal{R}(X_{\alpha})$-module of constant rank $k_{\alpha}$ `(I, 7.3.6)`;
to say that $\mathcal{B} \otimes_{\mathcal{A}} \mathcal{R}(X)$ is a locally free $\mathcal{R}(X)$-module means that, for
every $x \in X$, the ranks $k_{\alpha}$ corresponding to the indices such that $x \in X_{\alpha}$ are equal. The
question is in fact local, and one reduces to the case $X = \operatorname{Spec}(C)$, where $C$ is a reduced Noetherian
ring, and $\mathcal{B} = \tilde{D}$, where $D$ is a $C$-algebra that is a $C$-module of finite type; if
$\mathfrak{p}_{i}$ ($1 \leq i \leq m$) are the minimal prime ideals of $C$, the total ring of fractions $L$ of $C$ is
the direct sum of the fields of fractions $K_{i}$ of the integral rings $C/\mathfrak{p}_{i}$, and $D \otimes_{C} L$ is
the direct sum of the $D \otimes_{C} K_{i}$, whence the conclusion.

It is clear that under hypotheses (I) or (II), one thus defines a _homomorphism of sheaves of multiplicative monoids_
$N_{\mathcal{B}/\mathcal{A}} : \mathcal{B} \to \mathcal{A}$, also denoted by $N$ if no confusion may arise, and called
the _norm_ homomorphism. For two sections $f$, $g$ of $\mathcal{B}$ over the same open $U$, one therefore has

$$ N_{\mathcal{B}/\mathcal{A}}(fg) = N_{\mathcal{B}/\mathcal{A}}(f) \cdot N_{\mathcal{B}/\mathcal{A}}(g) (6.5.1.1) $$

for the corresponding sections of $\mathcal{A}$ over $U$;

$$ N_{\mathcal{B}/\mathcal{A}}(1_{\mathcal{B}}) = 1_{\mathcal{A}}; (6.5.1.2) $$

finally, for every section $s$ of $\mathcal{A}$ over $U$,

$$ N_{\mathcal{B}/\mathcal{A}}(s \cdot 1_{\mathcal{B}}) = s^{n} (6.5.1.3) $$

if the rank of $\mathcal{B}$ is constant and equal to $n$ (for $s = 0_{\mathcal{A}}$, this formula gives
$N(0_{\mathcal{B}}) = 0_{\mathcal{A}}$ if $n \geq 1$, and $N(0_{\mathcal{B}}) = N(1_{\mathcal{B}}) = 1_{\mathcal{A}}$ if
$n = 0$).

Under hypothesis (I), for $f \in \Gamma(U, \mathcal{B})$ to be invertible it is necessary and sufficient that $N(f) \in
\Gamma(U, \mathcal{A})$ be so. Under hypothesis (II), this condition is necessary; it is sufficient (by (6.4.7)) when
one supposes that $\mathcal{B} \to \mathcal{B} \otimes_{\mathcal{A}} \mathcal{R}(X)$ is injective and that the following
more restrictive hypothesis is satisfied:

- (II bis) $(X, \mathcal{A})$ _is a locally Noetherian reduced prescheme, $\mathcal{B}$ is a coherent
  $\mathcal{A}$-module such that $\mathcal{B} \otimes_{\mathcal{A}} \mathcal{R}(X)$ is a locally free
  $\mathcal{R}(X)$-module, and, for every section $f \in \Gamma(U, \mathcal{B})$ over an open $U$ such that $\mathcal{B}
  \otimes_{\mathcal{A}} \mathcal{R}(X)|U$ is of constant rank $n$ over $\mathcal{R}(X)|U$, the $\sigma_{j}(f)$ ($1 \leq
  j \leq n$) are sections of $\mathcal{A}$ over $U$._

(Again note that this condition is satisfied when $X$ is normal.)

**(6.5.2)**

<!-- label: II.6.5.2 -->

Suppose that one of the hypotheses (I), (II) of (6.5.1) is satisfied, and let $\mathcal{L}'$ be an invertible
$\mathcal{B}$-module. We shall associate to it canonically (up to unique isomorphism) an invertible $\mathcal{A}$-module
$\mathcal{L}$ in the following way. Denote by $\mathcal{A}*$ (resp. $\mathcal{B}*$) the subsheaf of $\mathcal{A}$ (resp.
$\mathcal{B}$) such that $\Gamma(U, \mathcal{A}*)$ (resp. $\Gamma(U, \mathcal{B}*)$) is the set of invertible

<!-- original page 127 -->

elements of $\Gamma(U, \mathcal{A})$ (resp. $\Gamma(U, \mathcal{B})$) for every open $U \subset X$; these are sheaves of
multiplicative groups, and $N_{\mathcal{B}/\mathcal{A}}$, restricted to $\mathcal{B}*$, is a _homomorphism_
$\mathcal{B}* \to \mathcal{A}*$ of sheaves of groups (6.5.1). Let $\mathfrak{L}$ be the set of pairs $(U_{\lambda},
\eta_{\lambda})$ having the following property: $U_{\lambda}$ is an open of $X$ and $\eta_{\lambda}$ is an isomorphism
$\mathcal{L}'|U_{\lambda} \xrightarrow{\sim} \mathcal{B}|U_{\lambda}$ of $(\mathcal{B}|U_{\lambda})$-modules. By
hypothesis, the $U_{\lambda}$ form a cover of $X$; for any two indices $\lambda$, $\mu$, one sets $\omega_{\lambda \mu}
= (\eta_{\lambda}|U_{\lambda} \cap U_{\mu}) \circ (\eta_{\mu}|U_{\lambda} \cap U_{\mu})^{-1}$, which is an automorphism
of $\mathcal{B}|U_{\lambda} \cap U_{\mu}$, canonically identified with a section of $\mathcal{B}*$ over $U_{\lambda}
\cap U_{\mu}$, and $(\omega_{\lambda \mu})$ is a `1`-cocycle of the cover $\mathfrak{U} = (U_{\lambda})$ with values in
$\mathcal{B}*$ `(0, 5.4.7)`. The fact that $N_{\mathcal{B}/\mathcal{A}} : \mathcal{B}* \to \mathcal{A}*$ is a
homomorphism then implies that $(N_{\mathcal{B}/\mathcal{A}} \omega_{\lambda \mu})$ is a `1`-cocycle of $\mathfrak{U}$
with values in $\mathcal{A}*$, and therefore corresponds (up to unique isomorphism) to an invertible
$\mathcal{A}$-module $\mathcal{L}$ `(0, 5.4.7)` which we shall denote by $N_{\mathcal{B}/\mathcal{A}}(\mathcal{L}')$ and
call the _norm_ of the invertible $\mathcal{B}$-module $\mathcal{L}'$.

Let $\mathfrak{M}$ be a subset of $\mathfrak{L}$ such that the corresponding $U_{\lambda}$ still form a cover of $X$,
and let $\mathfrak{B}$ be this cover; the restriction of the cocycle $(\omega_{\lambda \mu})$ to $\mathfrak{B}$ defines
a `1`-cocycle $(N_{\mathcal{B}/\mathcal{A}} \omega_{\lambda \mu})$ of $\mathfrak{B}$ with values in $\mathcal{A}*$, the
restriction of the `1`-cocycle $(N_{\mathcal{B}/\mathcal{A}} \omega_{\lambda \mu})$ of $\mathfrak{U}$; it is clear that
there is a canonical isomorphism from the invertible $\mathcal{A}$-module defined by this `1`-cocycle of $\mathfrak{B}$
onto $N_{\mathcal{B}/\mathcal{A}}(\mathcal{L}')$, which allows the invertible $\mathcal{A}$-module to be defined by any
sub-cover of $\mathfrak{U}$. This possibility immediately shows that, if $\mathcal{L}'_{1}$, $\mathcal{L}'_{2}$ are two
invertible $\mathcal{B}$-modules, then, by virtue of (6.5.1.1) and (6.5.1.2),

```text
  N(ℒ'₁ ⊗_ℬ ℒ'₂) = N(ℒ'₁) ⊗_𝒜 N(ℒ'₂)                                       (6.5.2.1)
```

and

$$ N_{\mathcal{B}/\mathcal{A}}(\mathcal{B}) = \mathcal{A} (6.5.2.2) $$

as well as

$$ N(\mathcal{L}'^{-1}) = (N(\mathcal{L}'))^{-1} (6.5.2.3) $$

up to canonical isomorphisms. Moreover, it follows from (6.5.1.3) that if $\mathcal{L}$ is an invertible
$\mathcal{A}$-module and if $\mathcal{B}$ is of constant rank $n$ over $\mathcal{A}$ in case (I) (resp. $\mathcal{B}
\otimes_{\mathcal{A}} \mathcal{R}(X)$ of constant rank $n$ over $\mathcal{R}(X)$ in case (II)), one has, up to canonical
isomorphism,

```text
  N_{ℬ/𝒜}(ℒ ⊗_𝒜 ℬ) = ℒ^{⊗n}.                                               (6.5.2.4)
```

**(6.5.3)**

<!-- label: II.6.5.3 -->

We now show that $N_{\mathcal{B}/\mathcal{A}}(\mathcal{L}')$ is a covariant functor in the category of invertible
$\mathcal{B}$-modules. Indeed, let $h' : \mathcal{L}'_{1} \to \mathcal{L}'_{2}$ be a homomorphism of invertible
$\mathcal{B}$-modules, and let $\mathfrak{B} = (U_{\lambda})$ be an open cover of $X$ such that for every $\lambda$ one
has $(\mathcal{B}|U_{\lambda})$-isomorphisms $\eta^{(1)}_{\lambda} : \mathcal{L}'_{1}|U_{\lambda} \xrightarrow{\sim}
\mathcal{B}|U_{\lambda}$ and $\eta^{(2)}_{\lambda} : \mathcal{L}'_{2}|U_{\lambda} \xrightarrow{\sim}
\mathcal{B}|U_{\lambda}$; there is then for each $\lambda$ an endomorphism $h'_{\lambda}$ of $\mathcal{B}|U_{\lambda}$
such that $h'_{\lambda} \circ \eta^{(1)}_{\lambda} = \eta^{(2)}_{\lambda} \circ (h'|U_{\lambda})$, and one can evidently
identify $h'_{\lambda}$ with a section of $\mathcal{B}$ over $U_{\lambda}$ `(0, 5.1.1)`. Hence, for every pair
$(\lambda, \mu)$ of indices, the restrictions to $U_{\lambda} \cap U_{\mu}$ of $(\eta^{(2)}_{\lambda})^{-1} \circ
h'_{\lambda} \circ \eta^{(1)}_{\lambda}$ and $(\eta^{(2)}_{\mu})^{-1} \circ h'_{\mu} \circ \eta^{(1)}_{\mu}$ coincide.
We deduce that for the `1`-cocycles $(\omega^{(1)}_{\lambda \mu})$ and $(\omega^{(2)}_{\lambda \mu})$ with values in
$\mathcal{B}*$ corresponding to $\mathcal{L}'_{1}$ and $\mathcal{L}'_{2}$, the relation

```text
  ω_{λμ}^{(2)} h'_μ = h'_λ ω_{λμ}^{(1)}.
```

<!-- original page 128 -->

If we set $h_{\lambda} = N(h'_{\lambda})$, we therefore have the analogous relations

```text
  N(ω_{λμ}^{(2)}) h_μ = h_λ N(ω_{λμ}^{(1)})
```

and consequently the $h_{\lambda}$ define a homomorphism $N(\mathcal{L}'_{1}) \to N(\mathcal{L}'_{2})$ which we shall
denote by $N_{\mathcal{B}/\mathcal{A}}(h')$ or $N(h')$. Under hypothesis (I), for $h'$ to be an isomorphism, it is
necessary and sufficient (since this is a local question) that $N_{\mathcal{B}/\mathcal{A}}(h')$ be one. Under
hypothesis (II), this condition is again necessary; it is sufficient if hypothesis (II bis) is satisfied and
$\mathcal{B} \to \mathcal{B} \otimes_{\mathcal{A}} \mathcal{R}(X)$ is injective.

Taking in particular $\mathcal{L}'_{1} = \mathcal{B}$, the homomorphisms $\mathcal{B} \to \mathcal{L}'$ are identified
`(0, 5.1.1)` with the sections of $\mathcal{L}'$ over $X$, whence a canonical map

```text
  N_{ℬ/𝒜} : Γ(X, ℒ') → Γ(X, N_{ℬ/𝒜}(ℒ')).
```

It also follows from (6.5.1.1) that if $f'_{1} \in \Gamma(X, \mathcal{L}'_{1})$, $f'_{2} \in \Gamma(X,
\mathcal{L}'_{2})$, one has

```text
  N(f'₁ ⊗ f'₂) = N(f'₁) ⊗ N(f'₂).                                          (6.5.3.1)
```

For every invertible $\mathcal{A}$-module $\mathcal{L}$ and every section $f \in \Gamma(X, \mathcal{L})$, one has,
taking (6.5.2.4) into account,

$$ N_{\mathcal{B}/\mathcal{A}}(f \otimes 1_{\mathcal{B}}) = f^{\otimes n} (6.5.3.2) $$

when $\mathcal{B}$ is of constant rank $n$ under hypothesis (I) (resp. when $\mathcal{B} \otimes_{\mathcal{A}}
\mathcal{R}(X)$ is of constant rank $n$ under hypothesis (II)). Finally, for the homomorphism $\mathcal{B} \to
\mathcal{L}'$ corresponding to a section $f'$ of $\mathcal{L}'$ over $X$ to be an isomorphism, it is necessary and
sufficient that $f'_{x}$ be a basis of $\mathcal{L}'_{x}$ for every $x \in X$; under hypothesis (I), this condition is
therefore equivalent to saying that $(N(f'))_{x}$ is a basis of $(N(\mathcal{L}'))_{x}$ for every $x$; under hypothesis
(II), this condition is again necessary, and it is sufficient when $\mathcal{B}$ satisfies (II bis) and $\mathcal{B} \to
\mathcal{B} \otimes_{\mathcal{A}} \mathcal{R}(X)$ is injective.

**(6.5.4)**

<!-- label: II.6.5.4 -->

Let $(X, \mathcal{A})$, $(X', \mathcal{A}')$ be two ringed spaces,

$$ f : X' \to X $$

a morphism, $\mathcal{B}$ an $\mathcal{A}$-algebra, $\mathcal{B}' = f*(\mathcal{B})$ the inverse image
$\mathcal{A}'$-algebra. One supposes that one of the following hypotheses is satisfied:

- 1° $\mathcal{B}$ satisfies hypothesis (I) of (6.5.1).
- 2° $(X, \mathcal{A})$ and $\mathcal{B}$ satisfy hypothesis (II) of (6.5.1), $(X', \mathcal{A}')$ is a locally
  Noetherian reduced prescheme, and, if one denotes by $X_{\alpha}$ and $X'_{\beta}$ the closed reduced subpreschemes of
  $X$ and $X'$ respectively having as underlying spaces the irreducible components of these spaces, the restriction of
  $f$ to each $X'_{\beta}$ is a dominant morphism from $X'_{\beta}$ into some $X_{\alpha}$.

Under these conditions, $\mathcal{B}'$ satisfies hypothesis (I) or hypothesis (II) of (6.5.1) respectively; the first
assertion is immediate. To establish the second, it suffices to see that for every $x' \in X'$, the ranks of the
$\mathcal{B}' \otimes_{\mathcal{O}_{X'}} \mathcal{R}(X'_{\beta})$ for the $\beta$ such that $x' \in X'_{\beta}$ are the
same. But if the restriction of $f$ to $X'_{\beta}$ is a dominant morphism into $X_{\alpha}$, the rank of $\mathcal{B}'
\otimes_{\mathcal{O}_{X'}} \mathcal{R}(X'_{\beta})$ is equal to that of $\mathcal{B} \otimes_{\mathcal{O}_{X}}
\mathcal{R}(X_{\alpha})$ (as one sees at once by reducing to the affine case as in (6.4.9)), whence our assertion by
virtue of hypothesis (II) and (6.5.1).

<!-- original page 129 -->

This being so, it follows from (6.4.8), (6.4.9), and (6.4.10) that if $s$ is a section of $\mathcal{B}$ over an open $U
\subset X$, $s'$ the corresponding section of $\mathcal{B}'$ over $f^{-1}(U)$, then $N_{\mathcal{B}'/\mathcal{A}'}(s')$
is the section of $\mathcal{A}'$ over $f^{-1}(U)$ which corresponds to the section $N_{\mathcal{B}/\mathcal{A}}(s)$ of
$\mathcal{A}$ over $U$.

If $\mathcal{M}$ is an invertible $\mathcal{B}$-module, one deduces from the preceding that if $\mathcal{M}' =
f*(\mathcal{M})$ (which is an invertible $\mathcal{B}'$-module), one has $N_{\mathcal{B}'/\mathcal{A}'}(\mathcal{M}') =
f*(N_{\mathcal{B}/\mathcal{A}}(\mathcal{M}))$ up to canonical isomorphism.

**(6.5.5)**

<!-- label: II.6.5.5 -->

Suppose henceforth that $(X, \mathcal{A})$ is a prescheme. The data of a quasi-coherent $\mathcal{A}$-algebra
$\mathcal{B}$ that is an $\mathcal{A}$-module of finite type is then equivalent, as we know, to that of a _finite_
morphism $g : X' \to X$ such that $g_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X'}) = \mathcal{B}$, defined up to $X$-isomorphism (6.1.2 and
1.3.1). Furthermore, to give a quasi-coherent $\mathcal{O}_{X'}$-module $\mathcal{F}'$ is equivalent to giving a
quasi-coherent $\mathcal{B}$-module $\mathcal{F}$ such that $g_{*}(\mathcal{F}') = \mathcal{F}$ (1.4.3), and for
$\mathcal{F}'$ to be invertible it is necessary and sufficient that $\mathcal{F}$ be so (6.1.12). To translate the
preceding results in terms of the finite morphism $g$, it will be necessary to suppose either that
$g_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X'})$ is a locally free $\mathcal{O}_{X}$-module (of finite type), or that $(X, \mathcal{O}_{X})$
and $g_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X'})$ satisfy hypothesis (II). For every invertible $\mathcal{O}_{X'}$-module $\mathcal{L}'$,
one then sets

$$ N_{X'/X}(\mathcal{L}') = N_{g_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X'})/\mathcal{O}_{X}}(g_{*}(\mathcal{L}')) (6.5.5.1) $$

and one calls this the _norm_ (relative to $g$) of $\mathcal{L}'$. Similarly, if $h' : \mathcal{L}'_{1} \to
\mathcal{L}'_{2}$ is a homomorphism of invertible $\mathcal{O}_{X'}$-modules, one sets

$$ N_{X'/X}(h') = N_{g_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X'})/\mathcal{O}_{X}}(g_{*}(h')) : N_{X'/X}(\mathcal{L}'_{1}) \to
N_{X'/X}(\mathcal{L}'_{2}). (6.5.5.2) $$

In particular, for $\mathcal{L}'_{1} = \mathcal{O}_{X'}$, one thus obtains a canonical map

```text
  N_{X'/X} : Γ(X', ℒ') → Γ(X, N_{X'/X}(ℒ')).                                (6.5.5.3)
```

We leave to the reader most of these translations, and confine ourselves to spelling out the following:

**Proposition.**

<!-- label: II.6.5.6 -->

Let $g : X' \to X$ be a finite morphism, and suppose that either $g_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X'})$ is a locally free
$\mathcal{O}_{X}$-module or that $(X, \mathcal{O}_{X})$ and $g_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X'})$ satisfy (II bis) (which will be
the case in particular when $X$ is locally Noetherian and normal). For a homomorphism $h' : \mathcal{L}'_{1} \to
\mathcal{L}'_{2}$ of invertible $\mathcal{O}_{X'}$-modules to be an isomorphism, it is necessary and sufficient, under
the first hypothesis, that $N_{X'/X}(h')$ be one; under the second hypothesis, this condition is again necessary, and it
is sufficient when the homomorphism $g_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X'}) \to g_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X'}) \otimes_{\mathcal{O}_{X}}
\mathcal{R}(X)$ is injective.

**Proof.** Note that here we use the fact that, for $g_{*}(h')$ to be an isomorphism, it is necessary and sufficient
that $h'$ be one (1.4.2).

**Corollary.**

<!-- label: II.6.5.7 -->

Let $g : X' \to X$ be a finite morphism, and suppose that either $g_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X'})$ is a locally free
$\mathcal{O}_{X}$-module or that $(X, \mathcal{O}_{X})$ and $g_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X'})$ satisfy (II bis) and
$g_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X'}) \to g_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X'}) \otimes_{\mathcal{O}_{X}} \mathcal{R}(X)$ is injective. Let
$\mathcal{L}'$ be an invertible $\mathcal{O}_{X'}$-module, $f'$ a

<!-- original page 130 -->

section of $\mathcal{L}'$ over $X'$, and $f = N_{X'/X}(f')$ the corresponding section of $\mathcal{L} =
N_{X'/X}(\mathcal{L}')$ over $X$ (6.5.5.1). Then $g(X' - X'_{f'}) = X - X_{f}$, and $X_{f}$ is the largest open subset
$U$ of $X$ such that $g^{-1}(U) \subset X'_{f'}$.

**Proof.** Indeed, $g(X' - X'_{f'})$ is closed in $X$ (6.1.10); it therefore suffices to prove the last assertion. Now
the relation $U \subset X_{f}$ is equivalent to the fact that the homomorphism $\mathcal{O}_{X}|U \to \mathcal{L}|U$
defined by $f|U$ is an isomorphism. By (6.5.6), this is equivalent to saying that the homomorphism
$\mathcal{O}_{X'}|g^{-1}(U) \to \mathcal{L}'|g^{-1}(U)$ defined by $f'|g^{-1}(U)$ is an isomorphism, that is, to the
relation $g^{-1}(U) \subset X'_{f'}$.

**Proposition.**

<!-- label: II.6.5.8 -->

Let $g : X' \to X$ be a finite morphism, $f : Y \to X$ a morphism; let $Y' = X'_{(Y)}$, $g' = g_{(Y)}$, $f' = f_{(X')}$,
so that one has the commutative diagram

```text
  X' ←─f'── Y'
  │          │
  g↓         ↓g'
  X ←──f──── Y
```

Suppose that either $g_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X'})$ is locally free, or that $(X, \mathcal{O}_{X})$ and
$g_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X'})$ satisfy (II), that $Y$ is a locally Noetherian reduced prescheme, and that the restriction of
$f$ to every irreducible component of $Y$ is a dominant morphism into an irreducible component of $X$. Then, for every
invertible $\mathcal{O}_{X'}$-module $\mathcal{L}'$, one has

$$ N_{Y'/Y}(f'*(\mathcal{L}')) = f*(N_{X'/X}(\mathcal{L}')) $$

up to canonical isomorphism.

**Proof.** Note that one has $f*(g_{*}(\mathcal{L}')) = g'_{*}(f'*(\mathcal{L}'))$ by virtue of (1.5.2), and in
particular $g'_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{Y'}) = f*(g_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X'}))$; if $g_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X'})$ is locally free, then
so is $g'_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{Y'})$. The conclusion then follows from the definitions and (6.5.4).

**Remark.**

<!-- label: II.6.5.9 -->

We shall later generalise the notion of norm developed above, and relate it to the notion of direct image of a divisor.

## 6.6. Application: criteria for ampleness

**Proposition.**

<!-- label: II.6.6.1 -->

Let $Y$ be a prescheme, $f : X \to Y$ a quasi-compact morphism, $g : X' \to X$ a finite and surjective morphism. Suppose
that either $g_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X'})$ is a locally free $\mathcal{O}_{X}$-module, or that $(X, \mathcal{O}_{X})$ and
$g_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X'})$ satisfy (II bis). Then, for every invertible $\mathcal{O}_{X'}$-module $\mathcal{L}'$ that is
ample for $f \circ g$, $\mathcal{L} = N_{X'/X}(\mathcal{L}')$ is ample for $f$.

**Proof.** We may assume $Y$ affine (4.6.4), and then by virtue of (4.6.6) the statement is equivalent to:

**Corollary.**

<!-- label: II.6.6.2 -->

Let $X$ be a quasi-compact prescheme, $g : X' \to X$ a finite surjective morphism such that either
$g_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X'})$ is a locally free $\mathcal{O}_{X}$-module or that $(X, \mathcal{O}_{X})$ and
$g_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X'})$ satisfy (II bis). Then, for every ample $\mathcal{O}_{X'}$-module $\mathcal{L}'$, $\mathcal{L}
= N_{X'/X}(\mathcal{L}')$ is ample.

**Proof.** Under the second hypothesis, we may further assume that the canonical homomorphism $g_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X'})
\to g_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X'}) \otimes_{\mathcal{O}_{X}} \mathcal{R}(X)$ is injective. Indeed, if not, let

<!-- original page 131 -->

$\mathcal{T}$ be the kernel of this homomorphism, which is a coherent ideal of $\mathcal{B} = g_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X'})$
`(I, 6.1.1)`, and set $X'' = \operatorname{Spec}(\mathcal{B}/\mathcal{T})$; we then have a commutative diagram

```text
  X'' ──h──→ X'
   \         /
   g'\      / g
       ↘  ↙
         X
```

where $h$ is a closed immersion (1.4.10). Furthermore, we know that the support of $\mathcal{T}$ is a closed set
`(0, 5.2.2)` rare in $X$ `(I, 7.4.6)`, whence we conclude that for the generic point $x$ of an irreducible component of
$X$, there is an affine open neighbourhood $U$ of $x$ such that $\mathcal{B}|U = (\mathcal{B}/\mathcal{T})|U$. Since $g$
is by hypothesis surjective, we thus conclude that $x \in g'(X'')$; $g'$ is therefore dominant, and being a finite
morphism, it is surjective (6.1.10); by definition, $g'_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X''}) \otimes_{\mathcal{O}_{X}} \mathcal{R}(X)
= (\mathcal{B}/\mathcal{T}) \otimes_{\mathcal{O}_{X}} \mathcal{R}(X) = g_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X'}) \otimes_{\mathcal{O}_{X}}
\mathcal{R}(X)$, so $(X, \mathcal{O}_{X})$ and $g'_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X''})$ satisfy (II bis), and moreover
$g'_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X''}) \to g'_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X''}) \otimes_{\mathcal{O}_{X}} \mathcal{R}(X)$ is injective.
Finally, $h*(\mathcal{L}') = \mathcal{L}''$ is an ample $\mathcal{O}_{X''}$-module (4.6.13, (i bis)), and we have
$N_{X''/X}(\mathcal{L}'') = N_{X'/X}(\mathcal{L}')$. Indeed, to define these two invertible $\mathcal{O}_{X}$-modules
one can use a single affine open cover $(U_{\lambda})$ of $X$ such that the restrictions of $g_{*}(\mathcal{L}')$ and
$g'_{*}(\mathcal{L}'')$ to $U_{\lambda}$ are respectively isomorphic to $\mathcal{B}|U_{\lambda}$ and
$(\mathcal{B}/\mathcal{T})|U_{\lambda}$. One sees at once that to every isomorphism $\eta_{\lambda} :
g_{*}(\mathcal{L}')|U_{\lambda} \to \mathcal{B}|U_{\lambda}$ there canonically corresponds an isomorphism

$$ \eta'_{\lambda} : g'_{*}(\mathcal{L}'')|U_{\lambda} \to (\mathcal{B}/\mathcal{T})|U_{\lambda} $$

so that, if $(\omega_{\lambda \mu})$ and $(\omega'_{\lambda \mu})$ are the `1`-cocycles corresponding to the systems of
isomorphisms $(\eta_{\lambda})$ and $(\eta'_{\lambda})$ (6.5.2), $\omega'_{\lambda \mu}$ is the canonical image in
$\Gamma(U_{\lambda} \cap U_{\mu}, \mathcal{B}/\mathcal{T})$ of $\omega_{\lambda \mu} \in \Gamma(U_{\lambda} \cap
U_{\mu}, \mathcal{B})$. By virtue of the definition of $\mathcal{T}$, one therefore concludes that

$$ N_{\mathcal{B}/\mathcal{A}}(\omega_{\lambda \mu}) = N_{(\mathcal{B}/\mathcal{T})/\mathcal{A}}(\omega'_{\lambda \mu})
$$

(with $\mathcal{A} = \mathcal{O}_{X}$), whence the asserted equality.

Suppose therefore that the homomorphism $g_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X'}) \to g_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X'}) \otimes_{\mathcal{O}_{X}}
\mathcal{R}(X)$ is injective when we are under hypothesis (II bis). It suffices to prove that, as $f$ runs over the
sections of $\mathcal{L}^{\otimes n}$ (for $n > 0$) over $X$, the $X_{f}$ form a base of the topology of $X$ (4.5.2).
Now let $x \in X$ and let $U$ be an arbitrary neighbourhood of $x$; since $g^{-1}(x)$ is finite (6.1.7) and
$\mathcal{L}'$ is ample, there exists an integer $n > 0$ and a section $f'$ of $\mathcal{L}'^{\otimes n}$ over $X'$ such
that $X'_{f'}$ is a neighbourhood of $g^{-1}(x)$ contained in $g^{-1}(U)$ (4.5.4). Since

$$ \mathcal{L}^{\otimes n} = N_{X'/X}(\mathcal{L}'^{\otimes n}) $$

it suffices to take $f = N_{X'/X}(f')$; indeed, then $X - X_{f} = g(X' - X'_{f'})$ (6.5.7), so $x \in X_{f} \subset U$.

**Corollary.**

<!-- label: II.6.6.3 -->

Under the hypotheses of (6.6.1), for an invertible $\mathcal{O}_{X}$-module $\mathcal{L}$ to be ample for $f$, it is
necessary and sufficient that $\mathcal{L}' = g*(\mathcal{L})$ be ample for $f \circ g$.

**Proof.** The condition is necessary, since $g$ is affine (5.1.12). To prove that the condition is sufficient, we may
assume $Y$ affine (4.6.4), hence $X$ and $X'$ quasi-compact and $\mathcal{L}'$ ample (4.6.6), and it remains to show
that $\mathcal{L}$ is ample. Now, the set of points

<!-- original page 132 -->

$x \in X$ in a neighbourhood of which $g_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X'})$ (resp. $g_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X'})
\otimes_{\mathcal{O}_{X}} \mathcal{R}(X)$) has a given rank $n$ in the first (resp. second) hypothesis is both open and
closed in $X$, so $X$ is the prescheme sum of a finite number of these opens, and we may therefore assume that it is
equal to one of them (4.6.17). But then $N_{X'/X}(\mathcal{L}') = \mathcal{L}^{\otimes n}$, hence $\mathcal{L}^{\otimes
n}$ is ample by virtue of (6.6.2), and so is $\mathcal{L}$ (4.5.6).

**Corollary.**

<!-- label: II.6.6.4 -->

Suppose that the hypotheses of (6.6.1) are satisfied and suppose further that $f : X \to Y$ is of finite type. Then, for
$f$ to be quasi-projective, it is necessary and sufficient that $f \circ g$ be so. If, moreover, we suppose that $Y$ is
a quasi-compact scheme, or a prescheme whose underlying space is Noetherian, then, for $f$ to be projective, it is
necessary and sufficient that $f \circ g$ be so.

**Proof.** The hypothesis implies that $f \circ g$ is of finite type. Taking into account the definition of
quasi-projective morphisms (5.3.1), the first assertion follows from (6.6.1) and (6.6.3). Taking this result and (5.5.3,
(ii)) into account, it remains to prove that when $f$ is assumed quasi-projective, for $f$ to be proper, it is necessary
and sufficient that $f \circ g$ be proper. Now $f$ is then separated (5.3.1) and of finite type; since $g$ is
surjective, our assertion follows from (5.4.2, (ii)) and (5.4.3, (ii)).

In particular:

**Corollary.**

<!-- label: II.6.6.5 -->

Let $X$ be a prescheme of finite type over a field $K$, $K'$ a finite-degree extension of $K$. For $X$ to be projective
(resp. quasi-projective) over $K$, it is necessary and sufficient that $X' = X \otimes_{K} K'$ be projective (resp.
quasi-projective) over $K'$.

**Proof.** The condition is indeed necessary (5.3.4, (iii) and 5.5.5, (iii)). Conversely, suppose it is satisfied, and
let $g : X' \to X$ be the canonical projection. It is clear that $g$ is a finite morphism (6.1.5, (iii)) and surjective
`(I, 3.5.2, (ii))`. Moreover, $g_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X'})$ is a locally free $\mathcal{O}_{X}$-module, being isomorphic to
$\mathcal{O}_{X} \otimes_{K} K'$ (1.5.2). It then follows from the hypothesis and from (6.1.11) and (5.5.5, (ii)) that
$X'$ is projective (resp. quasi-projective) over $K$; we then deduce from (6.6.4) that $X$ is projective (resp.
quasi-projective) over $K$.

In Chapter V, we will show that the statement of (6.6.5) remains valid when $K'$ is an arbitrary extension of $K$.

The end of this section is devoted to the proof of the criterion (6.6.11), which is a rather technical refinement of
(6.6.1); it may be omitted on a first reading.

**Lemma.**

<!-- label: II.6.6.6 -->

Let $X$ be a reduced Noetherian prescheme, $\mathcal{E}$ a coherent $\mathcal{O}_{X}$-module such that $\mathcal{E}
\otimes_{\mathcal{O}_{X}} \mathcal{R}(X)$ is a locally free $\mathcal{R}(X)$-module of constant rank $n$. Then there
exists a reduced Noetherian prescheme $Z$ and a finite birational morphism $h : Z \to X$ having the following property:
the morphisms of sheaves of sets $\sigma_{i} : \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal{O}_{X}}(\mathcal{E}, \mathcal{E}) \to
\mathcal{R}(X)$ ($1 \leq i \leq n$) (cf. (6.4.10)) send $\operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal{O}_{X}}(\mathcal{E}, \mathcal{E})$
into the coherent $\mathcal{O}_{X}$-algebra $h_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{Z})$.

**Proof.** Consider an affine open $U$ of $X$ of ring $\mathcal{A}(U) = A$; let $E = \Gamma(U, \mathcal{E})$, and let
`C_U` be the sub-algebra of $R(U)$ generated by the $\sigma_{i}(u)$ as $u$ runs over $\operatorname{Hom}_{A}(E, E)$; we
have seen (6.4.7.1) that this $A$-algebra is of finite rank. Moreover, it is clear that the formation of the algebras
`C_U` commutes with the restriction operations from an affine open $U$ to an affine open $U' \subset U$. We have thus
defined a finite sub-$\mathcal{O}_{X}$-algebra $\mathcal{C}$ of $\mathcal{R}(X)$ such that $\Gamma(U, \mathcal{C}) =
C_{U}$ for every affine open $U$ of $X$. We

<!-- original page 133 -->

shall take $Z = \operatorname{Spec}(\mathcal{C})$, and for $h$ the structure morphism, which is therefore finite
(6.1.2); since $\mathcal{C}$ is reduced, $Z$ is a reduced Noetherian prescheme (1.3.8). Finally, the total ring of
fractions of `C_U` is $R(U)$ by definition, and since `C_U` is contained in the integral closure of $\mathcal{A}(U)$ in
$R(U)$, there is a bijective correspondence between minimal prime ideals of $\mathcal{A}(U)$ and minimal prime ideals of
`C_U` ([13], t. I, p. 259), which proves that $h$ is birational and completes the proof.

**Corollary.**

<!-- label: II.6.6.7 -->

Under the hypotheses of (6.6.6), let $W$ be an open of $X$ such that, for every $x \in W$, either $X$ is normal at the
point $x$, or $\mathcal{E}_{x}$ is a free $\mathcal{O}_{x}$-module. Then we may suppose $h$ defined so that the
restriction of $h$ to $h^{-1}(W)$ is an isomorphism of $h^{-1}(W)$ onto $W$.

**Proof.** Indeed, either hypothesis implies that if $U \subset W$ is an affine open, then, with the notation of
(6.6.6), $(\sigma_{i}(u))_{x} \in A_{x}$ for every $x \in U$ (6.4.3), so $\sigma_{i}(u) \in A$, and the conclusion
follows from the definition of $h$ given in (6.6.6).

**(6.6.8)**

<!-- label: II.6.6.8 -->

Let $X$ be a reduced Noetherian prescheme, $g : X' \to X$ a finite surjective morphism, so that $\mathcal{B} =
g_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X'})$ is a coherent $\mathcal{O}_{X}$-algebra, and suppose moreover that $\mathcal{B}
\otimes_{\mathcal{O}_{X}} \mathcal{R}(X)$ is a locally free $\mathcal{R}(X)$-module of constant rank $n$. We can then
apply the lemma (6.6.6) taking $\mathcal{E} = \mathcal{B}$, whence, with the notation of (6.6.6), a homomorphism of
sheaves of multiplicative monoids $\sigma_{n} : \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal{O}_{X}}(\mathcal{B}, \mathcal{B}) \to
h_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{Z})$, and composing this homomorphism with the canonical homomorphism $\mathcal{B} \to
\operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal{O}_{X}}(\mathcal{B}, \mathcal{B})$ (6.5.1), one therefore obtains a homomorphism of sheaves
of multiplicative monoids:

```text
  N' : ℬ = g_*(𝒪_{X'}) → h_*(𝒪_Z) = 𝒞.                                     (6.6.8.1)
```

This being so, for every invertible $\mathcal{O}_{X'}$-module $\mathcal{L}'$, $g_{*}(\mathcal{L}')$ is an invertible
$\mathcal{B}$-module (6.1.12), and the method of (6.5.2) allows us to associate to $\mathcal{L}'$ functorially an
invertible $\mathcal{C}$-module, which we shall denote by $N'(g_{*}(\mathcal{L}'))$.

**Lemma.**

<!-- label: II.6.6.9 -->

Let $X$ be a reduced Noetherian prescheme, $g : X' \to X$ a finite surjective morphism such that
$g_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X'}) \otimes_{\mathcal{O}_{X}} \mathcal{R}(X)$ is a locally free $\mathcal{R}(X)$-module of constant
rank. Then there exists a reduced Noetherian prescheme $Z$ and a finite birational morphism $h : Z \to X$ having the
following property: for every ample $\mathcal{O}_{X'}$-module $\mathcal{L}'$, the invertible $\mathcal{O}_{Z}$-module
$\mathcal{M}$ such that $h_{*}(\mathcal{M}) = N'(g_{*}(\mathcal{L}'))$ (notation of (6.6.8)) is ample.

**Proof.** Suppose first that the homomorphism $\mathcal{B} \to \mathcal{B} \otimes_{\mathcal{O}_{X}} \mathcal{R}(X)$ is
injective. Define $Z$ and $h$ as in (6.6.6) (with $\mathcal{E} = g_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X'})$). Let $z \in Z$; we have to
show that there exists an integer $m > 0$ and a section $t$ of $\mathcal{M}^{\otimes m}$ over $Z$ such that $Z_{t}$ is
an affine open containing $z$ (4.5.2). Let $x = h(z)$, and let $U$ be an affine open of $X$ containing $x$; then
$h^{-1}(U)$ is an affine open neighbourhood of $z$, and it suffices to find $t$ such that $z \in Z_{t} \subset
h^{-1}(U)$, since $Z_{t}$ will then necessarily be affine (5.5.8). There exists by hypothesis an integer $n > 0$ and a
section $s'$ of $\mathcal{L}'^{\otimes n}$ over $X'$ such that

$$ g^{-1}(x) \subset X'_{s'} \subset g^{-1}(U) (6.6.9.1) $$

by virtue of (4.5.4). By definition, $s'$ is also a section of $g_{*}(\mathcal{L}')$ over $X$, and there corresponds to
it, as in (6.5.2), a section $s = N'(s')$ of $N'(g_{*}(\mathcal{L}'))$ over $X$.

<!-- original page 134 -->

We shall see that if $t$ is the section $s$ considered as a section of $\mathcal{M}$ over $Z$, then $t$ answers the
question. Set

```text
  V = X − g(X' − X'_{s'})                                                  (6.6.9.2)
```

which is an open of $X$ containing $x$ and contained in $U$, by virtue of (6.6.9.1) and (6.1.10). We shall show that

$$ h^{-1}(V) \subset Z_{t} \subset h^{-1}(U), (6.6.9.3) $$

which will complete the proof. It amounts to saying that the set $T$ of $y \in X$ such that $s_{y}$ is invertible
contains $V$ and is contained in $U$. For this, consider first an affine open $W$ contained in $V$; $g^{-1}(W)$ is an
affine open in $X'$, and by virtue of (6.6.9.2), $s'_{y'}$ is invertible for every $y' \in g^{-1}(W)$; by virtue of the
hypotheses on $X$ and $\mathcal{B}$, one can apply the results of (6.4.7) and one sees that if $y = g(y')$, then $s_{y}$
is invertible; in other words, $V \subset T$. On the other hand, it also follows from (6.4.7) that, conversely, if
$s_{y}$ is invertible, so is $s'_{y'}$, which implies $y' \in g^{-1}(U)$ by (6.6.9.1), and therefore $y \in U$, whence
$T \subset U$ in this case.

One passes from this to the general case by the same reasoning as in (6.6.2), replacing $X'$ by `X''` such that
$g'_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X''}) \to g'_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X''}) \otimes_{\mathcal{O}_{X}} \mathcal{R}(X)$ is injective, and
$\mathcal{L}'$ by an ample $\mathcal{O}_{X''}$-module $\mathcal{L}''$ such that $N'(g_{*}(\mathcal{L}')) =
N'(g'_{*}(\mathcal{L}''))$. The lemma (6.6.9) is therefore proven in all cases (with a suitable choice of $h$).

**Corollary.**

<!-- label: II.6.6.10 -->

Suppose that the hypotheses of (6.6.9) are satisfied; for every invertible $\mathcal{O}_{X}$-module $\mathcal{L}$ such
that $g*(\mathcal{L})$ is ample, $h*(\mathcal{L})$ is ample.

**Proof.** Indeed, if we set $\mathcal{L}' = g*(\mathcal{L})$, then $g_{*}(\mathcal{L}') = \mathcal{L}
\otimes_{\mathcal{O}_{X}} \mathcal{B}$ `(0, 5.4.10)`, so

```text
  N'(g_*(ℒ')) = (ℒ ⊗_{𝒪_X} 𝒞)^{⊗n}
```

(by the same reasoning as for (6.5.2.4)). We conclude that $\mathcal{M} = (h*(\mathcal{L}))^{\otimes n}$, and since
$\mathcal{M}$ is ample, so is $h*(\mathcal{L})$ (4.5.6).

**Proposition.**

<!-- label: II.6.6.11 -->

Let $Y$ be an affine scheme, $X$ a reduced Noetherian prescheme, $f : X \to Y$ a quasi-compact morphism, $g : X' \to X$
a finite surjective morphism. Let $W$ be an open part of $X$ such that, for every $x \in W$, either $X$ is normal at the
point $x$, or there exists an open neighbourhood $T \subset W$ of $x$ such that $(g_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X'}))|T$ is a
locally free $(\mathcal{O}_{X}|T)$-module. Then there exists a reduced $Y$-prescheme $Z$ and a finite and birational
$Y$-morphism $h : Z \to X$ such that the restriction of $h$ to $h^{-1}(W)$ is an isomorphism $h^{-1}(W)
\xrightarrow{\sim} W$ and which possesses the following property: for every invertible $\mathcal{O}_{X}$-module
$\mathcal{L}$ such that $g*(\mathcal{L})$ is ample relative to $f \circ g$, $h*(\mathcal{L})$ is ample relative to $f
\circ h$.

**Proof.** Since $Y$ is affine, $g*(\mathcal{L})$ is ample, and it is then a matter of proving that for a suitable
choice of $h$, $h*(\mathcal{L})$ is ample (4.6.6). We shall see that we can replace $g$ by a finite surjective morphism
$g' : X'' \to X$ such that $g'*(\mathcal{L})$ is ample and $g'_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X''}) \otimes_{\mathcal{O}_{X}}
\mathcal{R}(X)$ is a locally free $\mathcal{R}(X)$-module of constant rank; we will then be reduced to the conditions of
(6.6.10) and the proposition will be proven.

For this, let $\mathcal{B} = g_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X'})$; denote by $X_{i}$ ($1 \leq i \leq n$) the closed reduced
subpreschemes of $X$ having as their underlying spaces the irreducible components of $X$ `(I, 5.2.1)`; they are integral
by hypothesis. Let $X'_{i}$ be the closed

<!-- original page 135 -->

subprescheme $g^{-1}(X_{i})$ of $X'$, $g_{i} : X'_{i} \to X_{i}$ the morphism $g$ restricted to $X'_{i}$, which is
finite (6.1.5, (iii)) and surjective; let $k_{i}$ be the rank of the $\mathcal{O}_{X_{i}}$-algebra $\mathcal{B}_{i} =
(g_{i})_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X'_{i}})$. Since $\mathcal{B}_{i} \otimes_{\mathcal{O}_{X_{i}}} \mathcal{R}(X_{i})$ is a
constant presheaf `(I, 7.3.5)`, the rank $k_{i}$ is also the rank of the $(\mathcal{O}_{X}|U)$-algebra $\mathcal{B}|U$
for every open $U$ of $X$ meeting only the single irreducible component $X_{i}$. If $T$ is an open set in $X$ such that
$\mathcal{B}|T$ is isomorphic to $\mathcal{O}^{m}_{X}|T$, it follows from the preceding remark that the numbers $k_{i}$
are equal to $m$ for all the indices $i$ such that $T \cap X_{i} \neq \emptyset$. Let then $U$ be the open of $X$ formed
by the points in a neighbourhood of which $\mathcal{B}$ is a locally free $\mathcal{O}_{X}$-module, and let $U_{j}$ ($1
\leq j \leq s$) be its connected components, which are open in $X$ and finite in number (since $U$ is Noetherian);
denote by $V_{j}$ the closed subprescheme of $X'$, closure of the subprescheme induced on the open $g^{-1}(U_{j})$
`(I, 9.5.11)`. By the above, for all indices $i$ such that $X_{i} \cap U_{j} \neq \emptyset$, the ranks $k_{i}$ are all
equal to a single integer $m_{j}$; note moreover that a single $X_{i}$ cannot meet two $U_{j}$ of distinct indices. Let
$i_{\lambda}$ be the indices $i$ such that $X_{i} \cap U = \emptyset$. Consider the product $k$ of all the $k_{i}$, set
$n_{i} = k/k_{i}$, and let `X''` be the prescheme defined as follows. For each $j$ ($1 \leq j \leq s$), one considers
$k/m_{j}$ preschemes isomorphic to $V_{j}$, and for each $\lambda$, $k/k_{i_{\lambda}} = n_{i_{\lambda}}$ preschemes
isomorphic to $X'_{i_{\lambda}}$; `X''` is the sum of all these preschemes. One defines a morphism $g'' : X'' \to X'$
reducing to the canonical injection on each of the summands of `X''`; it is clear that `g''` is a finite dominant
morphism, hence surjective (since a finite morphism is closed (6.1.10)); set $g' = g \circ g''$, which is a finite
surjective morphism $X'' \to X$; one has $g'*(\mathcal{L}) = g''*(g*(\mathcal{L}))$, so $g'*(\mathcal{L})$ is an ample
$\mathcal{O}_{X''}$-module (5.1.12). It is clear then that for this new prescheme `X''`, the ranks defined like the
$k_{i}$ for $X'$ are all equal to $k$; taking `(I, 7.3.3)` into account, one immediately concludes that for every affine
open $T$ of $X$, $(g'_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X''}) \otimes_{\mathcal{O}_{X}} \mathcal{R}(X))|T$ is an
$(\mathcal{R}(X)|T)$-module isomorphic to $(\mathcal{R}(X)|T)^{k}$.

**Corollary.**

<!-- label: II.6.6.12 -->

If, in the statement of (6.6.11), we have $W = X$, then for an invertible $\mathcal{O}_{X}$-module $\mathcal{L}$ to be
ample relative to $f$, it is necessary and sufficient that $g*(\mathcal{L})$ be ample relative to $f \circ g$.

**Remark.**

<!-- label: II.6.6.13 -->

In Chapter III, we will see that, if $Y$ is Noetherian, $f$ of finite type, and if the restriction of $f$ to the closed
reduced subprescheme of $X$ having $X - W$ as its underlying space is proper, then the conclusion of (6.6.12) is still
valid. But we shall give in Chapter V examples of algebraic schemes $X$ over a field $K$ (the structure morphism $X \to
\operatorname{Spec}(K)$ not being proper) whose normalisation $X'$ is quasi-affine, but which is not quasi-affine (so
that $\mathcal{O}_{X}$ is not ample, even though $\mathcal{O}_{X'}$ is (5.1.12) and the morphism $X' \to X$ is finite
and surjective (6.3.10)). We shall see in the next section that this circumstance cannot occur when we replace
"quasi-affine" by "affine".

## 6.7. Chevalley's theorem

We shall establish (with the help of Serre's criterion (5.2.1)) the following theorem, which was proven by C. Chevalley
by other methods, in the case of algebraic schemes.

<!-- original page 136 -->

**Theorem.**

<!-- label: II.6.7.1 -->

Let $X$ be an affine scheme, $Y$ a Noetherian prescheme, and $f : X \to Y$ a finite surjective morphism. Then $Y$ is an
affine scheme.

**Proof.** It is clear that `f_red : X_red → Y_red` is finite (6.1.5, (vi)); since $X_{red}$ is an affine scheme, and
saying that $Y$ is affine is equivalent to saying that $Y_{red}$ is affine (since $Y$ is Noetherian `(I, 6.1.7)`), we
see that we may suppose $Y$ reduced. For every closed part $Y'$ of $Y$, there is then a single reduced subprescheme of
$Y$ having $Y'$ as its underlying space `(I, 5.1.2)`; its inverse image $f^{-1}(Y')$, canonically isomorphic to $X
\times_{Y} Y'$ `(I, 4.4.1)`, is affine as a closed subprescheme of $X$, and the restriction of $f$ to $f^{-1}(Y')$,
which is identified with $f \times_{Y} 1_{Y'}$, is a finite surjective morphism (6.1.5, (iii)). By virtue of the
principle of Noetherian induction `(0, 2.2.2)`, we may therefore (taking `(I, 6.1.7)` into account) reduce to proving
the theorem under the hypothesis that for every closed part $Y' \neq Y$, every closed subprescheme of $Y$ having $Y'$ as
its underlying space is affine. We thus conclude that, _for every coherent $\mathcal{O}_{Y}$-module $\mathcal{F}$ whose
(closed) support $Z$ is distinct from $Y$, one has_ $H^{1}(Y, \mathcal{F}) = 0$. Indeed, there exists a closed
subprescheme $Y'$ of $Y$ having $Z$ as its underlying space and such that, if $j : Y' \to Y$ is the canonical injection,
one has $\mathcal{F} = j_{*}(j*(\mathcal{F}))$ `(I, 9.3.5)`; consequently (5.2.3) $H^{1}(Y, \mathcal{F}) = H^{1}(Y',
j*(\mathcal{F})) = 0$ by `(I, 5.1.9.2)`.

Suppose first that $Y$ is not irreducible, and let $Y'$ be an irreducible component of $Y$ and $Y'' = Y - Y'$; we again
denote by $Y'$ the closed reduced subprescheme of $Y$ having $Y'$ as its underlying space, and by $j$ the canonical
injection $Y' \to Y$. Let $\mathcal{F}$ be a coherent $\mathcal{O}_{Y}$-module, and consider the canonical homomorphism

```text
  ρ : ℱ → ℱ' = j_*(j*(ℱ))
```

`(0, 4.4.3)`; $\mathcal{F}'$ is a coherent $\mathcal{O}_{Y}$-module by virtue of `(0, 5.3.10)` and `(0, 5.3.12)`, since
$j_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{Y'}) = \mathcal{O}_{Y}/\mathcal{J}$, denoting by $\mathcal{J}$ the sheaf of ideals of
$\mathcal{O}_{Y}$ defining the subprescheme $Y'$. Consequently $\mathcal{G} = Ker \rho$ and $\mathcal{K} = Im \rho$ are
also coherent $\mathcal{O}_{Y}$-modules `(0, 5.3.4)`; now by definition the fibre $\mathcal{F}'_{y}$ of $\mathcal{F}'$
at the generic point $y$ of $Y'$ is equal to $\mathcal{F}_{y}$, since $y$ is interior to $Y'$ and therefore
$\mathcal{J}_{y} = 0$, since $Y$ is reduced. We conclude that $y$ is not contained in the (closed) support of
$\mathcal{G}$; moreover, the support of $\mathcal{F}'$ (and _a fortiori_ that of $\mathcal{K}$) is contained in $Y'$; in
other words, the supports of $\mathcal{G}$ and $\mathcal{K}$ are distinct from $Y$. We deduce that $H^{1}(Y,
\mathcal{G}) = H^{1}(Y, \mathcal{K}) = 0$, and the exact sequence of cohomology applied to the exact sequence $0 \to
\mathcal{G} \to \mathcal{F} \to \mathcal{K} \to 0$ shows that $H^{1}(Y, \mathcal{F}) = 0$. We conclude by Serre's
criterion (5.2.1).

So suppose $Y$ irreducible, and hence integral. We may also suppose $X$ integral: indeed, if we denote by $X_{i}$ the
closed reduced subpreschemes of $X$ having as their underlying spaces the irreducible components of $X$ `(I, 5.2.1)` and
by $g_{i}$ the restriction of $g$ to $X_{i}$, then at least one of the $g_{i}$ is dominant, and since it is a finite
morphism (6.1.5), it is surjective (6.1.10); since $X_{i}$ is also an affine scheme, we see that we may replace $X$ by
$X_{i}$ in the statement.

**Lemma.**

<!-- label: II.6.7.1.1 -->

Let $X$, $Y$ be two integral Noetherian preschemes, $x$ (resp. $y$) the generic point of $X$ (resp. $Y$), $f : X \to Y$
a finite surjective morphism. Let $\mathcal{L}$ be an invertible $\mathcal{O}_{X}$-module such that there exists an
affine open neighbourhood $U$ of $y$ and a section $g \in \Gamma(X, \mathcal{L})$ for which

<!-- original page 137 -->

$x \in X_{g} \subset f^{-1}(U)$. Then there exist two integers $m > 0$, $n > 0$, a homomorphism $u : \mathcal{O}^{m}_{Y}
\to f_{*}(\mathcal{L}^{\otimes n})$, and an open neighbourhood $V$ of $y$ such that the restriction $u|V$ is an
isomorphism of $\mathcal{O}^{m}_{Y}|V$ onto $f_{*}(\mathcal{L}^{\otimes n})|V$.

**Proof.** Let $C$ be the (integral) ring of $U$, $k = \mathcal{O}_{y}$ its field of fractions: since $f$ is finite, $U'
= f^{-1}(U)$ is affine (1.3.2); let $D$ be its (integral) ring of fractions $K = \mathcal{O}_{x}$; by hypothesis $D$ is
a $C$-module of finite type (6.1.4), so $K$ is an extension of finite rank of $k$. The fibre $f^{-1}(y) = X \times_{Y}
\operatorname{Spec}(\kappa(y)) = X \times_{Y} \operatorname{Spec}(\mathcal{O}_{y})$ is identified with
$\operatorname{Spec}(K)$ `(I, 3.6.5)`; let $s_{i}$ ($1 \leq i \leq m$) be elements of $D$ forming a basis of $K$ over
$k$. There exists $n > 0$ such that the sections $(s_{i}|X_{g}) g^{\otimes n}$ of $\mathcal{L}^{\otimes n}$ over $X_{g}$
extend to sections $b_{i}$ ($1 \leq i \leq m$) of $\mathcal{L}^{\otimes n}$ over $X$ `(I, 9.3.1)`. The $b_{i}$ are also,
by definition, sections of $f_{*}(\mathcal{L}^{\otimes n})$ over $Y$ and therefore define a homomorphism $u :
\mathcal{O}^{m}_{Y} \to f_{*}(\mathcal{L}^{\otimes n})$ `(0, 5.1.1)`; we shall see that $u$ answers the question. One
has $\mathcal{L}^{\otimes n}|U' = \tilde{M}$, where $M$ is a $D$-module of finite type, so if $\phi$ is the injection $C
\to D$ corresponding to the morphism $f^{-1}(U) \to U$ given by the restriction of $f$, then $M_{[\phi]}$ is a
$C$-module of finite type; consequently

$$ f_{*}(\mathcal{L}^{\otimes n})|U = \tilde{M_{[\phi]}} $$

`(I, 1.6.3)` is coherent, and since $U$ is an arbitrary affine open of $Y$, $f_{*}(\mathcal{L}^{\otimes n})$ is
coherent; moreover, $u|U = \tilde{\theta}$, where $\theta$ is a $C$-homomorphism $C^{m} \to M_{[\phi]}$, and $u_{y} =
\theta_{y}$ is the homomorphism $\theta \otimes 1 : k^{m} = C^{m} \otimes K \to M_{[\phi]} \otimes K$; but the latter is
by definition an _isomorphism_, since the $(b_{i})_{x}$ form a basis of $M_{[\phi]} \otimes K$ over $k$, $g_{x}$ being
by hypothesis a generator of $(\mathcal{L}^{\otimes n})_{x}$. We conclude that the supports of the
$\mathcal{O}_{Y}$-modules `Ker u` and `Coker u` do not contain $y$; since these $\mathcal{O}_{Y}$-modules are coherent
`(0, 5.3.3)`, their supports are closed `(0, 5.2.2)`, whence the lemma.

This being so, the hypotheses of the lemma (6.7.1.1) are fulfilled in the case we are considering, by taking
$\mathcal{L} = \mathcal{O}_{X}$, since $X$ is affine `(I, 1.1.10)`; we shall set $\mathcal{A} = \mathcal{O}_{Y}$ and
$\mathcal{B} = f_{*}(\mathcal{O}_{X})$. By virtue of Serre's criterion (5.2.1.1), it suffices to prove that for every
coherent $\mathcal{O}_{Y}$-module $\mathcal{F}$, one has $H^{1}(Y, \mathcal{F}) = 0$; it even suffices to prove this
when $\mathcal{F} \subset \mathcal{O}_{Y}$, which entails that $\mathcal{F}$ is torsion-free since $Y$ is integral; in
fact we shall show that $H^{1}(Y, \mathcal{F}) = 0$ for every coherent torsion-free $\mathcal{O}_{Y}$-module
$\mathcal{F}$. Now the homomorphism $u : \mathcal{A}^{m} \to \mathcal{B}$ defines a homomorphism

```text
  v : 𝒢 = 𝓗𝓸𝓶_𝒜(ℬ, ℱ) → 𝓗𝓸𝓶_𝒜(𝒜^m, ℱ) = ℱ^m.
```

We first show that $v$ is injective: by hypothesis $\mathcal{T} = Coker u$ has a support not meeting $V$, hence is a
torsion $\mathcal{O}_{Y}$-module `(I, 7.4.6)`; the exact sequence

$$ \mathcal{A}^{m} \to \mathcal{B} \to \mathcal{T} \to 0 $$

gives, by left exactness of the functor $\operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal{A}}$, the exact sequence

```text
  0 → 𝓗𝓸𝓶_𝒜(𝒯, ℱ) → 𝒢 →^v ℱ^m.
```

But since $\mathcal{F}$ is torsion-free, one has $\operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal{A}}(\mathcal{T}, \mathcal{F}) = 0$
`(0, 5.2.6)`, whence our assertion. We therefore have the exact sequence

```text
  0 → 𝒢 → ℱ^m → Coker v → 0
```

<!-- original page 138 -->

where $\mathcal{G}$ and `Coker v` are coherent $\mathcal{O}_{Y}$-modules (`(0, 5.3.4)` and `(0, 5.3.5)`); by virtue of
the exact sequence of cohomology, it will suffice to show that $H^{1}(Y, \mathcal{G}) = H^{1}(Y, Coker v) = 0$ in order
to deduce $H^{1}(Y, \mathcal{F}^{m}) = (H^{1}(Y, \mathcal{F}))^{m} = 0$, and therefore $H^{1}(Y, \mathcal{F}) = 0$. Now
the restriction $v|V$ is an isomorphism, hence the support of `Coker v` is distinct from $Y$, whence $H^{1}(Y, Coker v)
= 0$ by the hypothesis at the start. On the other hand, $\mathcal{G}$ is a coherent $\mathcal{B}$-module `(I, 9.6.4)`;
since $X$ is affine over $Y$, there exists a quasi-coherent $\mathcal{O}_{X}$-module $\mathcal{K}$ such that
$\mathcal{G}$ is isomorphic to $f_{*}(\mathcal{K})$ (1.4.3); since $X$ is affine, one has $H^{1}(X, \mathcal{K}) = 0$
`(I, 5.1.9.2)`, hence also $H^{1}(Y, \mathcal{G}) = 0$ by (5.2.3), which completes the proof of theorem (6.7.1).

**Corollary.**

<!-- label: II.6.7.2 -->

Let $X$ be a Noetherian prescheme, $(X_{i})_{1 \leq i \leq n}$ a finite cover of the space $X$ consisting of closed
sets. For $X$ to be affine, it is necessary and sufficient that, for each $i$, there exist a closed subprescheme of $X$
having $X_{i}$ as its underlying space and which is affine.

**Proof.** Indeed, if this is so, let $X'$ be the scheme sum of the $X_{i}$; it is clear that $X'$ is affine, and one
defines a surjective morphism $f : X' \to X$ by taking as the restriction of $f$ to $X_{i}$ the canonical injection.
Everything comes down to verifying that $f$ is finite, by virtue of (6.7.1), and this has been seen in (6.1.5).

**Corollary.**

<!-- label: II.6.7.3 -->

For a Noetherian prescheme $X$ to be affine, it is necessary and sufficient that the closed reduced subpreschemes having
as their underlying spaces the irreducible components of $X$ be affine.
